Occupation_1: NCO-0201: Sand Moulding Certified Training

Occupation_2: NCO-0401: Shuttering & Hoist Operator

Occupation_3: NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATIONS-2015 (Code Structure)

Occupation_4: Directorate General of Employment www.ncs.gov.in NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATIONS-2015 (Code Structure)

Occupation_5: Directorate General of Employment www.ncs.gov.in FOREWORD National Classification of Occupation (NCO) plays a very vital role in maintaining standards of occupation in the country and is regularly used in the network of employment exchanges that constitute the Public Employment Service for Classification of Occupations, job postings and job search. This classification is used in all types of censuses and sample surveys conducted in India especially in data collection, processing, analysis and presentation of survey results besides its wide range of applications in policy formulation and policy analysis. The Directorate General of Employment, Ministry of Labour & Employment,

Occupation_6: Government of India is responsible for maintaining and updating the National Classification of Occupation in India aligned with the corresponding International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) of ILO. The first classification was NC0-1946 followed by NC0-1958, NC0- 1968, NC0-2004 and now the current series NC0-2015. The National Classification of Occupations-2015 (NC0-2015) is aligned with International Standard Classification of Occupations-2008 (ISC0-2008). 2. NCO is a classification of occupations which describes and assigns codes to the various occupations in the country and aligns it with the ISCO. These codes are reviewed and updated periodically to reflect developments in the labour market, particularly with the emergence of new occupations, as well as to align with changes in the international standard. These codes also help in promoting international comparability of statistical data relating to occupations. These occupational standards follow a scientific and hierarchical approach having major, minor and unit groups of classification which has evolved over the years to capture the structural changes in the employment market and current work practices and work environment. 3. The NC0-2015 is a compendium for occupational information available in the Indian economy. The document gives an insight into the occupational framework, nature of duties involved and the level of skill requirement to perform the activities in a real time work situation. The users of NCO may make use of the information for vocational guidance, career counselling and various surveys and studies undertaken by user agencies. The NC0-2015 has also been mapped with the National Industrial Classification (NIC) and Qualification Packs National Occupational Standards (QP-NOS) to cater to the structural changes in the labour market. Furthermore, NC0-2015 framework is dynamic enough to capture and reflect the newly emerging occupations in the industry. 4. The current volume of NCO details out the job description of 3600 civilian occupations covering 52 sectors, as compared to the earlier series of NCO i.e. NC0-2004, which contained the job descriptions for 2945 occupations. The NC0-2015 has 8 digit coding structure which was mapped and aligned to ISC0-2008 with the addition of 2 digits. There is one to one correspondence between ISC0-2008 and the NC0-2015 with the first digit representing the

Occupation_7: Division (Major GroupL second digit representing Sub-Division (Sub-Major GroupL third digit representing the Group (Minor Group) and the fourth digit representing the Family (Unit

Occupation_8: GroupL a decimal is introduced after the first four digits in order to create a distinction between the Families and individual Occupations. The NC0-2015 is in two Volumes viz. Vol I & II (A& B) where Vol I gives the abstract of Occupations along with their concordance to the earlier NC0-2004. Vol II gives the detailed descriptions ofthe occupations. I i 5. The Ministry is implementing the National Career Service (NCS) Project as a Mission Mode Project for modernising and transforming the network of employment exchanges and

Occupation_9: Model Career Centres are being set up in collaboration with States. The NCS Portal is operational at www.ncs.gov.in and aims to link job seekers with employment opportunities along with rich career content. The NCO Codes are integrally enmeshed in the NCS initiative and facilitates efficient job matching. The NCO Codes may be used by varied stakeholders in making information in the employment market more transparent and objective. Soft copies of the publication is available on the NCS portal. 6. The NC0-2015 series has been evolved along with career content to contribute to the knowledge repository of career options. More details on the classification, as well as the principles, scope and structure of the classification are available on the National Career

Occupation_10: Service (www.ncs.gov.in) platform. This knowledge repository provides career related information for use by career counsellors and job aspirants across the country and aims at supporting policy makers, students, job seekers, persons returning to the labour force, investors and employers in making better labour market decisions. 7. I am confident that the publication will prove useful in classifying occupations for official work, survey and research work, international comparisons on the demand and supply of workforce and many more such areas. I place on record my appreciation for all the stakeholders who have contributed their valuable inputs in the publication. I also take this opportunity to extend my thanks to the members of the Expert Group on the career content who have examined and vetted the contents of this publication/documents. I also extend my thanks to the officers of the Directorate lead by Mr. Pravin Srivastava, Deputy Director

Occupation_11: General (Employment) for timely coordination with all the stakeholders involved in this initiative. --~~Lj- (P.P. Mitra)

Occupation_12: Principal Labour & Employment Advisor and Director General Employment II ii J3.J1=J ~ x~ \J1 ~ II "l +-t ?II C'1 q wFcffi J3.{1=J ~ ~ 3i!lc0<'1, ~o~o~o ~ ~-110001 ~urm\ '+fRtl 'fl i( ¢I i( ~ "ff#rq Tele : 91-11-23 71 02 65 MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT

Occupation_13: Fax : 91-11-23 35 56 79 SHANKAR AGGARWAL, I.A.S. SHRAM SHAKTI BHAVAN E-mail :secy-labour@nic.in

Occupation_14: Secretary to Govt. of India NEW DELHI-110001 D.O. No. D,GE-11/01/2016-VG/01

Occupation_15: Dated: 1 7 J 5 f :L_o I f, Subject: Release of the National Classification of Occupation (NCO), 2015 series.

Occupation_16: The Directorate General of Employment (DGE) is responsible for revising and maintaining the National Classification of Occupations (NCO) on the lines of International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) of the ILO. The codes are used for classification of occupations by the employment exchanges and census/survey organisations of the

Occupation_17: Central and State government. These codes are revised from time to time to capture the changes in occupational patterns and structural changes in the economy. The codes also help in promoting International comparability of statistical data relating to occupations. The first set of occupation standards (ISCO) was brought out by the International Labour

Occupation_18: Organisation (ILO) in 1958 and revised from time to time, the latest being the 2008 series. The corresponding series in the Indian National Classification of Occupation (NCO) were 1958, 1967 and 2004. These occupational standards follow a scientific and hierarchical approach having major, minor and unit groups of classification which has evolved over the years to capture the structural changes in the employment market. The NCO codes are extensively used by the employment exchanges and other data/survey collection agencies like the Ministry of Statistics & PI (NSSO, CSO), Census Commissioner & RGI, NITI Aayog, IAMR, State Governments, Academic Institutions etc. 2. The current national series (NC0-2004) was based on the ISC0-1988 series and required updation to capture information on the new occupations that have emerged, especially on account of liberalisation and globalisation. In the meanwhile, the Ministry began implementing the National Career Service as a Mission Mode Project for modernising and transforming the network of employment exchanges and 100 Model Career Centres are being set up in collaboration with States. The NCS Portal is operational at www.ncs.gov.in and aims to link job seekers with employment opportunities along with rich career content. III iii The NCO Codes are integrally enmeshed in the NCS initiative and facilitates efficient job matching. The NCO - 2015 code is in 2 volumes, the first giving the abstract occupations along with their concordance to the earlier NC0-2004 series and the second volume giving the detailed occupational description. A hard copy of the first volume is enclosed for ready reference. It is requested that the NCO Codes may be used by all stakeholders in making information in the employment market more transparent and objective. Soft copies of these publications are available on the attached CD and also on the NCS portal. 3. I request that information about the publication be circulated to the various

Occupation_19: Departments and other users and its usage may be ensured by sending various statistical returns using these revised codes. We look forward to suggestions for improvement in the NCO codes and these may kindly be sent at feedback.dget@nic.in.

Occupation_20: All Secretary, GOI Ministries and Departments (As per list attached) IV iv ~ ~) \J14 11 '( n;i=?lrr.lC "':TTT<Q ~~~ -;:ffl ~-11 0001 ~ 3BtCll<1, 3l"nfo~o~o

Occupation_21: Tele : 91-11-23 71 02 65 ~ '<"l'<ctll'< cf; ~ MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT Fax : 91-11-23 35 56 79 SHANKAR AGGARWAL, I.A.S. SHRAM SHAKTI BHAVAN E-mail :secy-labour@nic.in

Occupation_22: Secretary to Govt. of India NEW DELHI-110001 D.O. No. DGE-11/01/2016-VG/01

Occupation_23: Dated: t l / .>/ ;;ur.r-£ Subject: Release of the National Classification of Occupation (NCO), 2015 series.

Occupation_24: All Secretary, GOI Ministries and Departments {As per list attached) VI vi

Occupation_25: Table of Contents 1 Introduction to Classification of 1 - 32 Occupations 2 Concordance Table 33 - 238 3 Alphabetical Index 239 - 371 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction INTRODUCTION TO CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATIONS

Occupation_26: Classification group organizes information meaningfully and systematically into a standard format that is useful for determining the similarity of ideas, events, objects or persons. The preparation of a classification group means the creation of an exhaustive and structured set of mutually exclusive and well-described categories often presented as a hierarchy that is reflected by the numeric or alphabetical codes assigned to them. Classification of occupation is used in the national context for the collection and dissemination of statistics from sources such as population censuses, labour market surveys, employer surveys, and other sources. It is also used by the Government and other organizations in activities such as administration of worker’s compensation, matching jobseekers with job vacancies, and management of employment-related migration. The classification of occupation is a categorization of individual occupations on the kind of work and skill-level involved in that particular occupation. It is intended that all the job titles in the nation can be assigned to one (and only one) of these categories or codes. 1. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND NCO 2015 NCO 2004 NCO 1968 NCO 1958 NCO 1946 1946 1958 1968 1988 2004 2008 2015 ISCO 1958 ISCO 1968 ISCO 1988 ISCO 2008 VOLUME I 1 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATION IN INDIA: 1946 TO 2015 1.1 National Classification of Occupations (NCO) 1946 The first effort in the direction of preparing an occupational classification system in India was made by the then Directorate General of Resettlement and Employment, DGRE (later called the

Occupation_27: Directorate General of Employment and Training (DGE&T) and now referred to as Directorate General of Training (DGT) ) in 1946 in bringing out a publication titled “Guide to Occupational Classification” primarily to be used by employment service for day-to-day work at the

Occupation_28: Employment Exchanges such as registration of applicants, documentation of vacancies, compilation of statistical data, etc. It was an industrial-based classification and was framed after the British pattern. 1.2 National Classification of Occupations (NCO) 1958

Occupation_29: International Labour Organization (ILO) brought out the first International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) in 1958 with a view to bring out a complete occupational classification system, which could help in promoting international comparability of statistical data relating to occupations. DGE&T accordingly took up the work of preparing an NCO on the lines of ISCO and brought out “National Classifications of Occupations – 1958”. NCO – 1958 contained detailed information about 1990 occupations in the following hierarchical pattern: 11 Occupational Divisions (one digit code number) 75 Occupational Groups (two digit code number) 331 Occupational Families (three digit code number) 1990 Occupations (five digit code number) VOLUME I 2 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 1.3 National Classification of Occupations (NCO) 1968 Both the ILO and the DGE&T continued to work for the improvement of their respective classification systems. The ILO introduced a number of changes in the ISCO – 58 viz. called it ISCO – 66, applied the principle of ‘type of work performed’ more rigidly, and revised the Major,

Occupation_30: Minor, and Unit Groups (corresponding to NCO Divisions, Groups, and Families) of the classification. In order to ensure that NCO – 68 is compatible with ISCO – 66, DGE&T revised the code structure so that the new NCO, called NCO – 68, would be patterned after the ISCO – 66.

Occupation_31: While adopting the ISCO – 66 code structure, deviations were made, wherever necessary, to suit the Indian conditions and settings. This edition attempted to group together occupations according to similarity of work performed and contained information about 2484 occupations on the following hierarchical pattern: 8 Occupational Divisions (one digit code number) 95 Occupational Groups (two digit code number) 462 Occupational Families (three digit code number) 2484 Occupations (five digit code number) This was a 5 digit classification system, which gave a unique title to every occupation (called the

Occupation_32: Standard Title) and in some cases alternative titles have also been given. This classification gave definitions of the occupations, a brief outline of the main tasks, and functions of each occupation thus bringing out the difference between one occupation and another. In this classification system, the grouping of occupations was based on the fundamental criteria of ‘type of work performed’. Accordingly, occupations were classified in the NCO – 68 so that all the workers engaged in the same type of work are grouped together irrespective of the industrial classification of establishments where they are engaged. For example, all clerical workers have been classified in one occupational group whether they are engaged in a factory, mine, VOLUME I 3 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction government office or even a shop. Similarly, drivers have been grouped together, and so are those engaged in services. The branch of economic activity (industry), in which a job occurs, did not affect the classification of occupations in the NCO – 68.

Occupation_33: However, this classification system did not take into account the skill involved in the performance of various occupations. This means, in effect, that occupations having similar nature of work, though requiring varied levels of skill for their performance, were grouped together. 1.4 National Classification of Occupations (NCO) 2004

Occupation_34: After a gap of about 3 decades the NCO – 04 was brought out. During this period, the economic, social, industrial, and agrarian fields underwent drastic changes. Globalization and economic liberalization had infused competitiveness amongst various industries. This led to changes in the work process and skill level of the workers. This also brought in a totally new class of jobs and functions.

Occupation_35: The International Labour Organization (ILO) revised ISCO – 66 on the recommendation of the

Occupation_36: International Conference of Labour Statisticians and brought out ISCO – 88. It was developed to facilitate international comparisons of occupational statistics and to serve as a model for countries developing or revising their national occupational classifications. The ILO came out with a new version wherein not only the work performed, but also the skill level required was considered in the codification of occupations. ISCO – 88 had three main aims namely: i. To facilitate international communication about occupations by supplying national statisticians with a tool to make national occupational data available internationally VOLUME I 4 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction ii. To make it possible for international occupational data to be produced in a form that can be useful for research as well as for specific decision-making and action-oriented activities. These activities could connect with international migration or job placement. iii. To serve as a model for countries developing or revising their national occupational classifications. However, ISCO – 88 was not intended to replace any existing national classification of occupations as the occupational classification systems of different countries was required to reflect the structure of their individual national labour markets. The framework necessary for designing and constructing ISCO – 88 was created in such a way that it not only defined the kind of work performed, but also the skill required to perform that particular job effectively. A “job” has been defined as a set of tasks and duties performed by one person and an “occupation” as a set of jobs whose tasks and duties are of a similar nature. “Skill” has been defined as the ability to carry out the tasks and duties of a given job, which encompasses two dimensions namely: i. Skill Level: A function that describes the range of the tasks and duties involved ii. Skill Specialization: Shows the field of knowledge required, the tools and machinery used, the materials worked on, and the kinds of goods and services produced

Occupation_37: In view of the international character of the classification, only four, broad skill levels were used.

Occupation_38: This classification of skill levels was more or less based on the educational categories and levels, which appear in the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED). It is also worth keeping in view that the focus was on the skills required to carry out the tasks and duties of an occupation and not on whether a worker working in a particular occupation is more or less skilled than another worker in the same occupation. VOLUME I 5 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction

Occupation_39: Level Requirements I Typically involves the performance of simple and routine Primary physical or manual tasks Education II Typically involves the performance of tasks such as operating a Secondary machinery and electronic equipment, driving vehicles, Education maintenance and repair of electrical and mechanical equipment, and manipulation, ordering, and storage information III Typically involves performance of complex technical and First University practical tasks that require an extensive body of factual, Degree technical, and procedural knowledge in a specialized field IV Typically involves the performance of tasks that require Post-Graduate complex problem-solving, decision-making, and creativity University based on an extensive body of theoretical and factual Degree knowledge in a specialized field

Occupation_40: The ISCO – 88 had the following hierarchical structure: 1. Major Groups: 10 2. Sub-Major Groups: 28 3. Minor Groups: 116 4. Unit Groups: 390

Occupation_41: The ten Major Groups in ISCO – 88 are: 1. Legislators, Senior Officials, and Managers 2. Professionals 3. Technicians & Associate Professionals 4. Clerks 5. Service Workers and Shop and Market Sales Workers 6. Skilled Agricultural and Fishery Workers 7. Craft and Related Trades Workers 8. Plant and Machinery Operators and Assemblers VOLUME I 6 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 9. Elementary Occupations 10. Armed Forces

Occupation_42: Significantly, the concept of skill level has not been applied in the case of legislators, senior officials, and managers based on information from national sources. Skills for executing task and duties of these occupations vary to such an extent that it is not feasible to link them with any of the four, broad ISCO – 88 skill levels. 1.4.1 Revision of NCO 1968 to NCO 2004

Occupation_43: The exercise on Revision of NCO – 1968 was undertaken by DGE&T through State Directorates of

Occupation_44: Employment and Vocational Rehabilitation Centres for Handicapped under the aegis of the DGE&T. A core group comprising technical committee called the Steering Committee was formed having members drawn from the various organizations like government bodies, ministries, universities, and research institutes.

Occupation_45: The Steering Committee recommended that a Core Group maybe formed to constantly guide and advise the DGE&T study team in their work. Accordingly, a Core Group was set-up having members drawn from the following organizations: 1. Directorate General of Employment & Training (DGE&T) 2. Central Statistical Organization 3. National Sample Survey Organization 4. Registrar General of India 5. Department of Small Scale Industries 6. State Director of Employment, NCT, Delhi 7. State Director of Employment, Andhra Pradesh A job analysis schedule was designed for collection of occupational information from various sources. The schedule was designed on the basis of occupational and educational information VOLUME I 7 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction available through the reports on Occupational Educational Pattern of Employees published under the Employment Market Information (EMI) programme of the DGE&T and other relevant sources. The job analysis schedule was designed to cover all aspects of an occupation. For the convenience of the job analysts, and to maintain uniformity, detailed guidelines for filling the job analysis schedules and highlighting the steps involved for collecting data for each item were specified in the schedule. Most of the officers who were put on the job of collection of occupational information on the job analysis schedules were drawn from EMI Units and VRCs where collection of occupational information forms are a regular feature of their jobs. The job analysis schedule was pre-tested in six states namely Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,

Occupation_46: Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, and Gujarat through the six Vocational Rehabilitation Centres for

Occupation_47: Handicapped (VRCs) functioning in these states. The data collected by the VRCs was analysed and the details about the same occupations coming from different VRCs were cross-checked. The schedule was then finalized and approved by the Core Group for adoption in the field.

Occupation_48: Employment Exchanges and Vocational Rehabilitation Centres collect labour market information so as to know about newly emerging areas and those going out of existence so that the jobseekers can be guided for gainful activities such as self-employment, etc. 1.4.2 NCO 2004 Methodology

Occupation_49: Since the primary source of collecting information is the “establishment”, it was necessary to ensure the widest coverage of the establishments. To achieve this wide coverage, following knowledge/information repositories were considered: i. Employers’ register maintained by the National Employment Service for their Employment

Occupation_50: Market Information Programme ii. Lists of employers organizations iii. List of establishments compiled by NSSO for conducting Annual Survey of Industries, etc. The final framework was prepared by the Employment Market Information Units, which is as follows: VOLUME I 8 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction

Occupation_51: The Employment Market Information Units were asked to update their employers’ registers by utilizing the data available from various sources like: 1. List of establishments compiled by NSSO for conducting annual survey of industries 2. Consultation with websites hoisted by corporate sector 3. Consultation with private placement agencies to the extent possible 4. Utilization of records maintained by various offices of state governments such as the ones maintained by:  The office of Inspector of Shops & Establishments  The office of Chief Inspector of Factories  The office of Inspector of Schools  The office of Local Mines Inspector  The office of District Industries Officer  The office of District Treasury Officer  Records from the Small Industries Service Institute  Employers’ Associations, etc. 1.4.3 Coverage of Unorganized Sector Unorganised sector was also covered by the VRCs during the course of job development work, particularly under the community-based rehabilitation programme in which the main thrust was on identifying occupations in the non-formal sector. 1.4.4 Collection Through Secondary Sources In addition to information collected by the job analysts through sample survey, efforts were made to collect data through various secondary sources like all the national and major regional newspapers, leading magazines, and the Internet. Occupational classification systems of other countries were also consulted to locate newly emerging occupations which have a relevance to the Indian conditions. Apart from this, other VOLUME I 9 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction organizations like RGI, CSO, NSSO, etc. also provided very useful inputs that served valuable for deciding on new occupations. 1.4.5 Co-Ordination and Liaising

Occupation_52: Since a large number of officers belonging to various agencies were involved in the whole exercise, co-ordination and liaising between various agencies was achieved firstly through distribution of the detailed Manual of Procedure on Revision of NCO to each and every officer involved in the process. Secondly, constant touch through correspondence, telephone, fax, and e- mail, etc. was maintained by the DGE&T study team with all those involved in the exercise. The field analysts were encouraged to get even the slightest doubts cleared. 1.4.6 Processing of the Job Analysis Schedules A large volume of data thus collected became available at DGE&T Headquarters, which was classified according to NIC codes. The job descriptions of the same occupation received from different sources were edited and consolidated to have an average picture of the job duties of the occupation. These average pictures were then compared with the job descriptions of the existing occupations to identify new occupations. Duplication was taken care out to ensure inclusion of only new occupations. 1.4.7 Skill Level Before codifying all the occupations on the pattern of ISCO – 88, the skill levels as defined in the ISCED were modified to suit the Indian conditions taking particular cognizance of informal skill. In the Indian context, the skills necessary to perform the tasks and duties of a given job can be acquired not only through formal education but also through informal training and experience.

Occupation_53: The four skill levels thus defined for NCO – 04 vis-à-vis the skill levels defined in ISCO – 88 are as given below:

Occupation_54: Skill Level ISCO – 88 Educational NCO – 2004 Educational Requirements

Occupation_55: Requirements I Primary Education Up to 10 years of formal education and/or informal VOLUME I 10 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction skills II Secondary Education 11-13 years of formal education III First University Degree 14-15 years of formal education IV Post-Graduate University More than 15 years of formal education

Occupation_56: Degree The skill level of each newly identified occupation was decided on the basis of information about academic and technical qualifications and experience requirement as also the average job description of the occupation to see whether the job requirement was of administrative, managerial, and supervisory nature or of a subordinate/repetitive nature in the Indian context.

Occupation_57: In keeping with the skill levels defined above to suit the Indian conditions, following divisions were classified in tune with the defined skill levels to accommodate occupations: NCO 2004 Title Skill Level

Occupation_58: Divisions 1 Legislators, Senior Officials, and Managers Not Defined* 2 Professionals IV 3 Associate Professionals III 4 Clerks II 5 Service Workers and Shop & Market Sales Workers II 6 Skilled Agricultural and Fishery Workers II 7 Craft and Related Trades Workers II 8 Plant and Machine Operators and Assemblers II 9 Elementary Occupations I X Workers not Classified by Occupations - VOLUME I 11 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction * The concept of skill level was not applied in the case of legislators, senior officials, and managers as skills for executing task and duties of these occupations varied to such an extent that it was not be feasible to link them with any of the four, broad skill levels. 1.4.8 Levels of Aggregation In keeping with the pattern of classification of occupations adopted in ISCO – 88, it was decided to have one more level of aggregation between Division and Group called Sub-Division. The nomenclature for different levels of aggregation is as under: NCO – 68 ISCO – 88 NCO – 2004 DIVISION MAJOR GROUP DIVISION GROUP SUB-MAJOR GROUP SUB-DIVISION FAMILY MINOR GROUP GROUP - - - UNIT GROUP FAMILY OCCUPATION - - - - - - - - - - - - OCCUPATION 1.4.9 Finalization and Codification The focus in NCO – 2004 was on the skills required to carry out the tasks and duties of an occupation and not on whether the worker holding a particular occupation was more skilled than another worker in the same occupation. In case of multi-skill occupations, the coding was done on the basis of the predominant skill required to perform the tasks in a job role. All the 2945 Occupations (both existing and newly identified) were grouped together according to combinations of specific duties, tasks, and work functions. They were grouped in such a way that the job roles performed were the same or closely related. Each occupation was assigned a six digit code, a distinct title (in some cases alternative titles have also been provided), and a definition. VOLUME I 12 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction NCO 2004 Code Structure Number of Units Six Digits Code Number Denoted by

Occupation_59: Family 439 First four digits of code number Occupations 2945 Last two decimal digits of the code number The occupations have been first assigned to the ten Occupational Divisions (identified by the initial digit in the code number) on the basis of their job description. The first code indicates the Division in which the job falls under. The first and second code indicates the Sub-Division under which the job role falls. The first three digits make up the Group of the job role, and the first four digits together make the Family under which the job role is categorized. The last two digits indicate the unique code for that particular job role. Disaggregation after Family have been made to accommodate initially up to nine ‘two digit’ codes within each Family keeping a provision for accommodating up to 99 Occupations in each Family. In a Family, the relation between occupations was determined by the similarity of characteristics of work done and the level of skill. The most important feature of a Family was that the Occupations included were closely related to each other than to Occupations outside the Family. The last two digits of the code numbers for the individual Occupations within a Family were numbered in sequence, usually leaving intervals of 5 or 10 between numbers depending on the number of Occupations to be accommodated within the Family. This also left a scope for accommodating any new Occupations that maybe identified later without disturbing the basic code structure. Shorter intervals between the code numbers of two consecutive Occupations VOLUME I 13 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction were kept to denote the close proximity of the nature of work of the two Occupations whereas larger intervals would denote dissimilarity of the nature of work of the two Occupations. A period (.) separates the final two digits from the code number of the Family.

Occupation_60: The revision of NCO – 2004 was carried out in line with the approach adopted by ILO in its ISCO – 88. As such, all the Unit Groups in ISCO – 88 were adopted as Families at 4 digit level, even though in some cases no Occupations at the specified skill level were identified so far. This was done to accommodate Occupations, which may become available in the near future.

Occupation_61: Owing to introduction of the concept of skill level and new aggregation at six digit level in the NCO – 2004 classification, the code structure was radically changed. This resulted into breaking up and/or merger of some Divisions, Groups, and Families of the 1968 version. Due to this, exact equivalents of all the codes in the 68 version may not be available.

Occupation_62: As in the earlier editions, separate codes were not provided for apprentices, foremen, and instructors (in-plant). These maybe classified by prefixing ‘A’, ‘B’ or ‘C’ respectively before the code number of the occupation which is being learned, supervised or instructed. VOLUME I 14 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 2. National Classification of Occupations – 2015

Occupation_63: Globalization of the labour market has increased the demand for internationally comparable occupational data for both statistical and administrative purposes. In India, there is a huge gap between jobseekers and job providers, training institutions, and related industries. In the last ten years, there has been a sea of change in almost all the sectors as most jobs have become mechanized or computerized. These changes need to reflect in the NCO as well. Therefore, the first step to achieve the vision of connecting youth with job opportunities was to create a fresh new repository of occupations.

Occupation_64: In 2015, Training wing of DGE&T has become a part of the Ministry of Skills Development and

Occupation_65: Entrepreneurship whereas the Employment wing is responsible for NCO – 2015.

Occupation_66: The main objectives of updating the NCO are:  To create a useful model for the development of National Classifications of Occupations (NCO)  To make NCO – 2015 compatible to ISCO – 2008 so that it is relevant for international reporting, comparisons, and exchange of statistical and administrative information about occupations 2.1 Need for Revision

Occupation_67: Currently, the employability and vocational skills upgradation sectors in India are undergoing a paradigm shift. The dynamics and outlook towards labour is increasingly becoming market- responsive and driven by constantly evolving needs. Simultaneously, the employment aspirational quotient and needs of individuals who seek employment have already evolved and are closely aligned with global trends and factors. Aligning to these factors and requirements, the DGE&T has envisioned a multidimensional approach for evolution. DGE&T envisaged aligning and upgrading NCO – 2004 using the guided baseline provided by ISCO – 2008. The need for this revision was to get accurate data from the market along with research into sectors/industries and to identify the size and profile of the sectors/industries, types of occupations, key trends, developments, and opportunities for progression. VOLUME I 15 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction

Occupation_68: Today’s ease of connectivity with the world and access to technology has made information available to one and all. It is important therefore that all those who seek employment be connected to those who provide it, and sustain them in employment. To address this element, DGE&T created a central portal that will cross-connect the employee to the employer. This portal, after revision of the NCO, will have relevant and comparative information that will assist potential jobseekers to understand, evaluate, and decide on a suitable career entry. 2.2 Mapping the QP NOS to the Job Roles in NCO – 2015

Occupation_69: In India, general education and vocational education training have been operating as separate verticals with little interaction between the two. In order to facilitate mobility from vocational to general education, and vice-versa, a national qualification framework was developed. The National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) was brought out by National Skill

Occupation_70: Development Agency. NSQF is based on an outcome-based approach and each level in the NSQF is defined and described in terms of competency levels that need to be achieved. The job roles corresponding to each of these competency levels would be ascertained with the involvement of the industry through the Sector Skill Councils (SSCs).

Occupation_71: The use of NSQF will make it easier for the institutes, students, and employers to pursue a particular course and address the issues of inequity and disparity in qualifications. As a competency-based and outcome-based qualification framework, NSQF will facilitate Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL). NSQF will also help to align Indian qualifications to international qualifications. The National Occupational Standards (NOS) is one of the most important contributions of the

Occupation_72: National Skills Development Corporation (NSDC) to the skills environment of India. This was done in affiliation with the Sector Skill Councils (SSCs). The SSCs are the national partnership organization with NSDC that bring together all the stakeholders – industry, labour, and the academia. VOLUME I 16 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction NOS defines the measurable performance outcomes required from an individual engaged in a particular task. NOS lists down what an individual should know and do while performing a particular task.

Occupation_73: The SSCs play a pivotal role in linking the gap between what the industry wants and what should be the curriculum for a skilling programme. One of the functions of the SSC is developing skill competency standards and qualifications, which form the National Occupational Standards (NOS). Essentially NOS are benchmarks of good practice. The set of NOS for a job role is called a QP or

Occupation_74: Qualification Packs. The Government has clearly stated that the SSCs will provide their sector- specific competency frameworks or Qualification Packs, which help in both the creation of curriculum and assessments. As the NCO is a comprehensive repository for national occupations, all the QPs released by the various sector/industries through NSDC are mapped to the job roles in the NCO – 2015. A QP NOS in the NCO – 2015 is aligned to a job role wherever an exact match is found. A new job role was added to the NCO where there was no description of a job role specified as per a given QP NOS.

Occupation_75: Thus, all the QPs released by the various SSCs are mapped and added during the creation of NCO – 2015. The NCO – 2015 would be updated as and when new QPs are released by the SSCs. The

Occupation_76: Employment wing of DGE&T will undertake any alignment of QP NOS to NCO –2015 in the future. 2.3 Outline of the Revision Exercise A five step approach was followed to update the existing NCO – 2004. The exercise was to align the job roles in NCO – 2004 to ISCO – 2008 and also map the job roles to various sectors and industries along with the existing NIC – 2008. The NCO job roles were also classified into jobs that were relevant, needed any modification or were completely obsolete. The Qualification Packs (QP) released by National Skills Development Corporation (NSDC) were also mapped to the NCO – 2015 job roles. VOLUME I 17 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction

Occupation_77: The five steps approach is: 1. Aligning existing NCO – 2004 to ISCO – 2008 to create NCO – 2015 2. Mapping the QPs to the job roles in NCO – 2015 3. Coding the NCO – 2015 job roles 4. Mapping the job roles to the sectors/industry 5. Mapping the job roles to NIC – 2008 6. Classifying the job roles as relevant, relevant with modification, and obsolete 2.4 Aligning NCO – 2015 to ISCO – 2008

Occupation_78: While aligning NCO – 2004 to ISCO – 2008, it was noticed that a number of completely new Sub-

Occupation_79: Major Groups, Minor Groups, and Unit Groups have been introduced to ISCO – 2008. This led to a total revamp of Groups and Families in NCO – 2015. Many existing Families were either split or merged into different Families.

Occupation_80: The changes thus made showed that NCO – 2004 was out of date in some areas as a result of the impact of development in technology as many jobs now depended on the use of computers and telecommunications. Thus, the merger or spilt of Families reflected occupational and technological change in the current labour market. During the mapping exercise, the nature of work performed has been given more emphasis than the formal education in determining the skill level of the occupation.

Occupation_81: Skill Level ISCO – 08 Educational Requirements NCO – 2015 Educational Requirements I Primary Education Up to 10 years of formal education and/or informal skills II Secondary Education 11-13 years of formal education III First University Degree 14-15 years of formal education IV Post-Graduate University Degree More than 15 years of formal education VOLUME I 18 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction The skill level of each newly identified Occupation was decided on the basis of information about academic and technical qualifications and experience requirement as also the average job description of the occupation to see whether the job requirement was of administrative, managerial, supervisory nature or of a subordinate/repetitive nature in the Indian context.

Occupation_82: In keeping with the skill levels defined above to suit Indian conditions, following Divisions were classified in tune with the defined skill levels to accommodate Occupations: NCO 2015 Title Skill Level

Occupation_83: The following changes occurred in NCO – 15 after it was aligned/mapped to ISCO – 2008:  Updating job roles linked to the information and technology sector  Expansion of job roles in the health sector  Reorganization of job roles for clerks. This was again reorganized to reflect the rapid growth of information and technology VOLUME I 19 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction  Reorganization of job roles that fall under the categories of sales and service workers, personal service workers , personal care workers, and protective services workers  New Families were added to suit the national requirements  Detailed categorization of job roles in information and services sector like tourism  Division X – Workers not classified by Occupations were removed from NCO – 2015 classification 3. International Classification of Occupations NCO – 2004 followed a six digit coding structure with a decimal after the first four digits. The first four are single digit representation of Division, Sub-Division, Group, and Family respectively. The last two digits of the code, after the decimal, denote the individual Occupation. NCO – 2004 was based on ISCO – 1988 and it is almost a decade since it was updated. Meanwhile, ILO has also published a revised version of ISCO in 2008. Many changes have taken place in the economic, social, industrial, and agrarian fields and have resulted in creation of new jobs and functions in the Indian labour market during this period.

Occupation_84: In order to understand and incorporate the best practices across the world, five international Occupational Classifications were studied along with NCO – 2004 as specified below: 1. International Labour Organization – International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) 2. United States of America – Standard Occupation Classification (SCO) 3. Australia & New Zealand – Australian and New Zealand Standard Classification of Occupations (ANZCO) 4. Germany – Klassifikation der Berufe (KlDB) 5. Canada – National Occupational Classification VOLUME I 20 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 3.1 International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) International Labour Organization (ILO) has developed ISCO for the classification of occupations from an international perspective. The latest published version is ISCO – 2008. This classification system contains the following categories: 10 Major Groups 43 Sub-Major Groups 130 Minor Groups 436 Unit Groups ISCO – 2008 has a four digit coding structure with a single digit representation for Major Groups,

Occupation_85: Sample Code Sample Code Title 8153 Sewing Machine Operators 3.2 United States of America – Standard Occupation Classification In United States of America, the latest version of Occupational Classification available is the Standard Occupation Classification 2010 (SOC – 2010). This classification system contains following categories: 23 Major Groups 97 Sub-Major Groups 461 Broad Occupations 840 Detailed Occupations VOLUME I 21 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction SOC – 2010 has a six digit coding structure with a representation for Major (2 digits), Minor, Broad Occupation (2 digits), and Detailed Occupations.

Occupation_86: Sample Code Sample Code Title 51-6031 Sewing Machine Operator 3.3 Australia and New Zealand – ANZCO Australia and New Zealand Standard Classification of Occupations Version 1.2 (1220.0 ANZCO) is the latest occupational classification available in Australia & New Zealand. This classification system contains the following categories: 8 Major Groups 43 Sub-Major Groups 97 Minor Groups 358 Unit Groups 1024 Occupations ANZCO has a six digit coding structure with representation for Major, Sub-Major, Minor, and Unit Groups and Occupations (2 digits).

Occupation_87: Sample Code Sample Code Title 711611 Sewing Machinist 3.4 Germany – Klassifikation der Berufe In Germany, the latest Occupation Classification available is Klassifikation der Berufe 2010 (KldB 2010). This classification system contains the following categories: VOLUME I 22 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 10 Occupational Areas 37 Occupational Main Groups 144 Occupational Groups 700 Occupational Sub-Groups 1286 Occupational Types KldB 2010 has a five digit coding structure with a single digit representation for Occupational Areas, Occupational Main Groups, Occupational Groups, Occupational Sub-Groups, and Occupational Types. The first four digits represent the kind of Occupation and the last digit represents the skill level.

Occupation_88: Sample Code Sample Code Title 28222 Occupations in the clothing, hat and cap manufacturing— technically- oriented activities 3.5 Canada – National Occupational Classification In Canada, the latest version of the Occupation Classification available is National Occupational

Occupation_89: Classification 2011 (NOC – 2011). This classification system contains the following categories: 10 Broad Occupations 40 Major Groups 140 Minor Groups 400 Unit Groups VOLUME I 23 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction NOC – 2011 has a four digit coding structure with a single digit representation for Broad Occupations, Major, Minor, and Unit Groups. This coding structure is quite similar to the ISCO

Occupation_90: Sample Code Sample Code Title 9446 Industrial Sewing Machine Operators VOLUME I 24 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 4. NCO – 2015 Coding Structure

Occupation_91: There have been numerous changes in the international sphere, which have been captured in the ISCO – 2008 and other international standards. It was necessary to review the coding structure of NCO to accommodate the changing labour market environment in the country as well as globally. This was done with the help of the National Competency Framework (NSQF), which is an outcome-based approach and functions through the qualifications pack – QP NOS. Based on the analysis of the abovementioned international classifications and the factors impacting skill and labour environment in India, an enhanced framework for the NCO was created. This framework incorporates the following:  Type of occupation  Skill level needed for the occupation  Linkage to the QP NOS and NSQF levels

Occupation_92: To accommodate the linkage to QP NOS, an 8 digit coding structure was suggested. An expert committee was established to review and accept the suggested 8 digit coding structure for NCO – 2015. This coding structure was based on the NCO – 2004 coding structure mapped and aligned to ISCO – 2008 with the addition of 2 digits, which will represent the QP NOS.

Occupation_93: Coding Structure NCO – 2015 Digits Representation Corresponding Mapping to ISCO – 2008

Occupation_94: The first four digits Family Unit Group The first two digits after the decimal Occupation VOLUME I 25 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction

Occupation_95: The last two digits after the decimal QP NOS  The first digit of NCO – 2015 will represent the Division (Major Group in ISCO)  The first two digits of NCO – 2015 will represent the Sub-Division (Sub-Major Group in ISCO)  The first three digits of NCO – 2015 will represent the Group (Minor Group in ISCO)  The first four digits of NCO – 2015 will represent the Family (Unit Group in ISCO)  A decimal is introduced after the first four digits in order to create a distinction between the Families and individual Occupations.  The first two digits after the decimal of NCO – 2015 will represent the different occupations that can be combined under the given Family  The last two digits after the decimal in NCO – 2015 shall represent the availability of a QP NOS for the job role.  The value of the last two digits would depend on two scenarios: i. If QP NOS is available, then the value of the last 2 digits after the decimal will be between1-99 (arranged sequentially) ii. If QP NOS is unavailable, then the value of the last two digits after the decimal will remain 00 4.1 NCO 2015 – Illustration of the Code

Occupation_96: An illustrative example of the proposed NCO – 2015 code is shown below for the code – 8153.0111 (Sewing Machine Operator, General):

Occupation_97: Code: 8153.0111 Job Title: Sewing Machine Operator, General 8 Division In this example, ‘8’ stands for the Division which is

Occupation_98: Plant and Machine Operators and Assemblers 81 Sub-Division 81 stands for the Sub-Division of the Occupation, which is Stationary Plant and Machine Operators 815 Group 815 represents the Group under which the occupation VOLUME I 26 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction falls, which is Textiles, Fur and Leather Products

Occupation_99: Machine Operators 8153 Family 8153 denotes the Family under which the occupation is listed, which is Sewing Machine Operators 8153.01 Occupation .011 indicates the Occupation under the given Family, which is Sewing Machine Operator, General 8153.0111 Occupation 1 (the last digit in .0111) denotes the QP NOS reference i.e. Sewing Machine Operator published by QP NOS Reference

Occupation_100: The NCO – 2015 Coding Structure can accommodate 9999 Families. There can be a maximum of 99 Occupations under each Family. There can be a maximum of 99 QP NOS references per Occupation.

Occupation_101: Considering the dynamics of the labour market and addition of new QP NOS by the SSCs over a period of time, the NCO – 2015 codes would be reviewed and updated periodically. This eight digit coding structure provides ample scope for addition of Families or Occupations to the NCO, if required, in the future. 4.2 Mapping the Job Roles to the Sectors/Industry Once the job roles/occupations were mapped as per ISCO – 2008, they were also classified as per the sector/industry in which they fit. This mapping will help the Career Counsellors to guide a jobseeker in gaining the correct job as per the relevant sector. Thus, all the job roles in the newly created NCO – 2015 were mapped to the relevant sectors. The data generated was then shared with experts from the industries for validation. 4.2.1 Mapping the Job Roles to NIC VOLUME I 27 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction Job roles in the NCO – 2015 are also mapped to the National Industrial Classification 2008 (NIC), which is an essential statistical standard for developing and maintaining comparable database according to economic activities. NIC classifies the economic activities under three broad categories viz. primary production (agriculture and mining), secondary production (manufacturing and construction), and services (transport, commerce, administration, etc.)

Occupation_102: The NIC – 2008 seeks to provide a basis for the standardized collection, analysis, and dissemination of industry- (economic activity) wise economic data for India. Apart from being the standard industrial classification, NIC is widely used by the government agencies, industry associations, and researchers for various administrative, analytical, and research purposes. Thus linking or mapping the NCO – 2015 would encompass not only the broad-based economic activities, but also all the job roles that would be a part of these activities. NIC – 2008 coding is based on economic activities under various sectors/industries. The activities are broadly classified under various sectors/industries. This classification does not accommodate every job role in a sector. Currently NIC – 2008 has 21 sections (A to U) corresponding to the various sectors. All the NCO – 2015 Occupations have been classified as per sectors and mapped to NIC – 2008. There are certain occupations that may feature in more than one sector. For example, the occupation of Storyboard Artist (NCO – 2015 Code: 2166.0209), which has QP NOS

Occupation_103: Reference of Media & Entertainment SSC - MES/Q0507, has employment prospect in multiple economic activities such as activities of individual writers for all subjects including fictional writing, technical writing, etc. (NIC 2008 Code: 90004), Publishing of computer games for all platforms (NIC 2008 Code: 58203), and Video Production (NIC 2008 Code: 59112). 4.3 Classifying the Job Roles NCO – 2015 defines and describes various occupations available in the country giving them standard and alternative occupational titles. As per DG&ET, a job analysis of all job codes was VOLUME I 28 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction essential. The task involved analysis of all job codes in terms of relevance and completeness, and categorizing them in three groups namely:  Relevant (R)  Relevant with Modification (RM)  Redundant/Obsolete (O) It is observed that with time, some job codes have become irrelevant. The reason is that either the job profiles do not exist due to changing requirements of the industry or they may require certain modifications. A thorough study of all job codes was undertaken and each job code was categorised as relevant, relevant with modification, and redundant/obsolete. The break-up of each category is explained below: R – All the previous codes that are relevant according to the current work practices and environment to be marked as R (Relevant) RM – All the previous codes that are relevant according to the current work practices and environment, but with certain modification (like modification in job description, modification/changes in the title, changes/modifications in skill level) to be marked as RM (Relevant with Modification) O – All the previous codes that are no longer relevant to the current work practices and environment to be marked as O (Redundant/Obsolete). Industry experts were consulted to review the NCO – 2015 job roles and validate the categorization of NCO codes as R, RM, and O. The industry experts also validated the cases wherein new codes have been proposed. 5. National Career Service Project (NCSP) 5.1 The National Career Service Project (NCSP) VOLUME I 29 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction

Occupation_104: The aim of the Government is to ensure that the aspiring youth of India pursue the right career choice. Keeping this in mind the main objective of the DGE&T is career counselling. Career counselling will not only help the youth to choose the right job for them, but will also help with better skills for enhancing growth and development. Taking this forward, DGE&T and

Occupation_105: Government have taken-up the task of establishing a knowledge repository within the National

Occupation_106: Career Service Project (NCSP). This knowledge repository shall act as a common, centralized platform to provide career-related information to career counsellors and aspirants across the country. This repository will not only store data, but will also link jobs with the appropriate industrial sectors. Occupations listed and mapped under NCO – 2015 will act as the beginning point of creating career content, which will then form a part of the knowledge repository of the

Occupation_107: The aim of the NCSP is:  To provide gainful employment to all jobseekers registered with Employment Exchanges  To facilitate interaction between jobseekers and employers  To disseminate accurate and consistent employment market information to all stakeholders on time

Occupation_108: The NCSP, therefore, is a comprehensive and multipronged transformational project with the following key aspects: 5.1.1 Model Career Centres (MCC)

Occupation_109: The aim is to transform the current Employment Exchange Offices into Career Counselling

Occupation_110: Centres. These career centres would serve as a one-stop-shop for all career related needs of the youth and students seeking counselling and employment. These career centres shall undertake all the activities related to NCSP i.e. establishing inter-linkages with industry for managing the demand side while on the other hand providing counselling and job assistance services to the supply side. VOLUME I 30 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 5.1.2 Developing a Network of Professional Career Counsellors NCSP plans to establish a network of career counsellors. This will be done by transforming the existing Employment Exchange Offices into Career Counselling Centres and also identifying other institutions/agencies that can volunteer in the career counselling activities. The training of the career counsellors will be undertaken by the Training wing of DGE&T. 5.1.3 National Career Service Portal Implementation

Occupation_111: The National Career Service Portal will act as a platform to bridge the gap between the government and private job providing ecosystem, jobseeker, and skill development ecosystem. 5.1.4 Maintenance of Knowledge Repository of Career Counselling Content For Employment Exchange Officers to work effectively as Career Counsellors, they need to have access to an updated knowledge repository of various career options and employment opportunities. This content should be renewed on quarterly basis based on the feedback provided by various stakeholders. VOLUME I 31 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 5.1.5 Inform, Educate, Communicate (IEC) Activities NCSP will work with a variety of partners like NGOs, schools, colleges, jobseekers, skill institutions, employers, volunteer agencies, technology partners, verification agencies, etc. For this, a programme will be developed that will Inform, Educate, Communicate (IEC) to reach out to these partners. VOLUME I 32 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table CONCORDANCE TABLE OF NCO 2015 With Occupational Titles and Equivalent NCO 2004 Codes VOLUME I 33 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Occupation_112: Sub- 11 Chief Executives, Senior Officials and Legislators

Occupation_113: Family 1111 Legislators 1111.0100 Elected Official, Union Government 1111.10 1111.0200 Elected Official, State Government 1112.10 1111.0300 Elected Official, Local Bodies 1113.10 1111.9900 Legislators, Other 1119.90

Occupation_114: Family 1112 Senior Government Officials 1112.0100 Administrative Official, Union Government 1121.10 1112.0200 Diplomat 1121.20 1112.0300 Executive Officials, Union Government 1121.30 1112.0400 Administrative Official, State Government 1122.10 1112.0500 Executive Official, State Government 1122.20 1112.0600 Administrative and Executive Officials, Quasi 1123.10

Occupation_115: Government (Central) 1112.0700 Administrative & Executive Officials, Quasi 1123.20

Occupation_116: Government (State) 1112.0800 Administrative and Executive Officials, Local 1124.10

Occupation_117: Bodies 1112.9900 Senior Government Officials, Other 1129.90

Occupation_118: Family 1113 Traditional Chiefs and Heads of Villages VOLUME I 34 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Occupation_119: Family 1114 Senior Officials of Special Interest Organizations 1114.0100 Political Worker 1141.10 1114.0200 Senior Officials of Employers, Workers and Other 1142.00

Occupation_120: Economic Interest Organizations 1114.0300 Director, Disaster Management Services 1143.10 1114.9900 Senior Officials of Special Interest Organizations, 1143.90

Occupation_121: Family 1120 Managing Directors and Chief Executives 1120.0100 Working Proprietor, Electricity 1211.10 1120.0200 Working Proprietor, Gas 1211.20 1120.0300 Working Proprietor, Water Supply 1211.30 1120.0400 Director, Electricity 1211.40 1120.0500 Director, Gas 1211.50 1120.0600 Director, Water Supply 1211.60 1120.0700 Director, Bank 1212.10 1120.0800 Director, Insurance 1212.20 1120.0900 Working Proprietor, Mines/Proprietor, Mines 1213.10 1120.1000 Working Proprietor, Quarry/Proprietor, Quarry 1213.20 1120.1100 Working Proprietor, Well Drilling/Proprietor, 1213.30

Occupation_122: Well Drilling 1120.1200 Working Proprietor, Construction/Proprietor, 1213.40

Occupation_123: Construction VOLUME I 35 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1120.1300 Director, Construction 1213.50 1120.1400 Director, Mines 1213.60 1120.1500 Director, Quarry 1213.70 1120.1600 Director, Well Drilling 1213.80 1120.1700 Working Proprietor, Manufacturing/Proprietor, 1214.10

Occupation_124: Manufacturing 1120.1800 Director Manufacturing 1214.20 1120.1900 Working Proprietor, Wholesale Trade/Proprietor, 1214.30

Occupation_125: Wholesale Trade 1120.2000 Working Proprietor, Retail Trade/Proprietor, 1214.40

Occupation_126: Retail Trade 1120.2100 Director, Wholesale Trade 1214.50 1120.2200 Director, Retail Trade 1214.60 1120.2300 Working Proprietor, Transport 1215.10 1120.2400 Director, Transport 1215.20 1120.2500 Director, Communication 1215.30 1120.2600 Director, Airport 1215.40 1120.2700 Working Proprietor, Storage and Warehousing 1216.10 1120.2800 Director, Storage and Warehousing 1216.20 1120.2900 Working Proprietor, Lodging and Catering 1217.10

Occupation_127: Services 1120.3000 Director, Lodging and Catering Services/Director 1217.20

Occupation_128: Food and Beverage Service 1120.3100 Executive Chef 1217.30 VOLUME I 36 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1120.3200 Working Proprietor, Recreation and 1218.10

Occupation_129: Entertainment 1120.3300 Director, Recreation and Entertainment 1218.20 1120.3400 Station Director, Radio/TV 1218.30 1120.3401 Account Director ( Advertising Agency) 1120.3402 Sales Director (Media Org) 1120.3500 Working Proprietor, Other Services 1219.10 1120.3600 Director, Other Services 1219.20 1120.3700 Director, Museum/Zoo 1219.30 1120.3800 Chief Librarian 1219.40 1120.3900 Principal, College 1219.50 1120.9900 Managing Directors and Chief Executives, Others 1211.90

Occupation_130: Group 121 Business Services and Administration Managers

Occupation_131: Family 1211 Finance Managers 1211.0100 General Manager, Bank 1307.10 1211.0200 General Manager, Insurance 1307.20 1211.0300 Purser, Ship 1231.10 1211.9900 Finance Managers, Others 1231.9

Occupation_132: Family 1212 Human Resource Managers 1212.0100 Personnel Manager 1232.10 1212.9900 Personnel and Industrial Relations Managers, 1232.90 VOLUME I 37 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Occupation_133: Family 1213 Policy and Planning Managers 1213.0100 Manager, Automotive Service 1239.10 1213.0101 Quality Assurance Standards In-Charge 1213.0102 Manager – Customer Quality 1213.0200 Manager, Automotive Service Station 1239.20 1213.0201 Area Service Manager 1213.0202 Territory Service Manager 1213.9900 Managers, Other Services 1239.90

Occupation_134: Family 1219 Business Services and Administration Managers

Occupation_135: Not Elsewhere Classified 1219.0100 Manager, Import and Export 1227.30 1219.0101 Export Manager 1219.0200 Manager, Health Club/Manager, Fitness 1228.10

Occupation_136: Group 122 Sales, Marketing and Development Managers

Occupation_137: Family 1221 Sales and Marketing Managers 1221.0100 Sales Manager (Wholesale Trade) 1233.10 1221.0200 Sales Manager (Retail Trade) 1233.20 1221.0301 Home Delivery Manager 1221.0401 Territory Sales Manager (Broadband) 1221.0501 Territory Sales Manager (Prepaid) 1221.0601 Sales Co-Ordinator (Media Org) VOLUME I 38 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1221.0602 Sales Manager (Media Org) 1221.9900 Sales and Marketing Managers, Other 1233.90

Occupation_138: Family 1222 Advertising and Public Relation Managers 1222.0100 Manager, Advertising and Promotion 1234.10 1222.0102 Advertising Operations Co-Ordinator (Digital) 1222.0200 Manager, Fashion/Fashion Manager 1234.20 1222.9900 Advertising and Public Relations Department 1234.90

Occupation_139: Family 1223 Research and Development Managers 1223.0101 Manager Testing Facility 1223.0102 Manager Material Testing 1223.0201 Research Associate

Occupation_140: Sub- 13 Production and Specialized Services Managers

Occupation_141: Group 131 Production Managers in Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

Occupation_142: Family 1311 Agricultural and Forestry Production Managers 1311.0100 General Manager, Plantation 1301.20 1311.0200 General Manager, Horticulture 1301.30 1311.0300 General Manager, Agricultural Farm 1301.10 1311.0400 General Manager, Livestock Farm 1301.40 1311.0500 General Manager, Dairy Farm 1301.50 1311.0600 General Manager, Poultry 1301.60 VOLUME I 39 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1311.0700 Manager, Agricultural Farm 1221.10 1311.0800 Manager, Plantation 1221.20 1311.0900 Manager, Nursery 1221.22 1311.0901 Rubber Nursery Manager 1311.1000 Manager, Aerial Planting and Cultivation 1221.24 1311.1100 Manager, Orchard 1221.26 1311.1200 Manager, Horticulture Farm 1221.30 1311.1300 Manager, Livestock Farm 1221.40 1311.1400 Manager, Dairy Farm 1221.50 1311.1500 Manager, Poultry Farm 1221.60 1311.9900 Agricultural and Forestry Production Managers, 1221.90

Occupation_143: Family 1312 Aquaculture and Fisheries Production Managers

Occupation_144: Family 1321 Manufacturing Managers 1321.0100 Manager, Electricity 1222.40 1321.0200 Terminal Manager 1222.45 1321.0300 Manager, Gas 1222.50 1321.0400 Manager, Water Supply 1222.60 1321.0500 Manager, Food Processing Plant 1222.65 1321.0600 Manager, Manufacturing 1222.70 1321.0700 General Manager, Electricity 1302.40 VOLUME I 40 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1321.0800 General Manager, Gas 1302.50 1321.0900 General Manager, Water Supply 1302.60 1321.1000 General Manager, Manufacturing 1302.70 1321.9900 Manufacturing Managers, Other 1302.90

Occupation_145: Family 1322 Mining Managers 1322.0100 Manager, Mine 1222.10 1322.0200 Manager, Quarry 1222.20 1322.0300 Manager, Well Drilling 1222.30 1322.0400 General Manager, Mine 1302.10 1322.0500 General Manager, Quarry 1302.20 1322.0600 General Manager, Well Drilling 1302.30 1322.9900 Mining Managers, Other 1222.90

Occupation_146: Family 1323 Construction Managers 1323.0100 Manager, Construction/Manager Construction 1223.10

Occupation_147: Projects 1323.0200 Manager, Land Survey 1223.20 1323.0300 General Manager, Construction/General 1303.10

Occupation_148: Manager Construction Projects 1323.9900 Construction Managers, Other 1303.90

Occupation_149: Family 1324 Supply, Distribution and Related Managers 1324.0100 Manager, Material Control/Manager Materials 1235.10 1324.0101 Manager Supplier Quality 1324.0102 Material Co-Ordination Manager VOLUME I 41 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1324.0103 Manager Vendor Development 1324.0200 Manager, Transport 1226.10 1324.0300 Station Master, Roadways 1226.15 1324.0400 Traffic Inspector, Motor Transport 1226.17 1324.0500 Manager, Traffic 1226.20 1324.0600 Traffic Inspector, Railway 1226.25 1324.0700 Traffic Inspector, Tram 1226.29 1324.0800 Manager, Flight Operation 1226.30 1324.0900 Aerodrome Officer 1226.35 1324.1000 Flight Operation Officer, Air Service 1226.37 1324.1100 Traffic Officer, Air Service/Traffic Controller 1226.39 1324.1200 Manager, Storage and Warehousing 1226.50 1324.1201 Warehouse Supervisor 1324.1300 Goods Supervisor, Railway 1226.52 1324.1400 Goods Supervisor, Road Transport 1226.54 1324.1500 Station Master, Railway 1226.60 1324.1600 Platform Inspector, Railway 1226.62 1324.1700 Rates Inspector, Railway 1226.64 1324.1800 Depot Starter, Tram 1226.65 1324.1900 Section Controller, Railway 1226.67 1324.2000 Accident Officer, Tram 1226.69 1324.2100 General Manager, Transport 1306.10 VOLUME I 42 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1324.2200 General Manager, Storage and Warehousing 1306.30 1324.9900 Supply, Distribution and Related Managers and 1226.90

Occupation_150: Group 133 Information and Communications Technology

Occupation_151: Family 1330 Information and Communication Technology

Occupation_152: Services 1330.0100 Manager, Communication 1226.40 1330.0101 Communication Analyst 1330.0200 Contract Officer, Telephone/Liaising Officer/ 1226.70 PRO/Business Executive 1330.0300 Post Master 1226.80 1330.0600 General Manager, Communication 1306.20 1330.0701 Cluster Manager 1330.9900 Information and Communication Technology

Occupation_153: Family 1345 Education Managers 1345.0100 Headmaster 1229.20

Occupation_154: Family 1346 Financial and Insurance Service Branch VOLUME I 43 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Occupation_155: Managers 1346.0100 Manager, Bank 1227.10 1346.0200 Manager, Insurance 1227.20 1346.9900 Financial and Insurance Service Branch 1227.90

Occupation_156: Family 1349 Professional Services Managers Not Elsewhere

Occupation_157: Sub- 14 Hospitality, Retail and Other Services Managers

Occupation_158: Family 1411 Hotel Managers 1411.0100 Manager, Lodging and Catering 1225.10

Occupation_159: Services/Resident Manager 1411.0200 General Manager, Lodging and Catering Services 1305.10 1411.9900 Hotel Managers, Others 1225.90

Occupation_160: Family 1412 Restaurant Managers 1412.0100 Manager, Fast Food Service 1225.20 1412.9900 Restaurant Managers, Other 1305.90

Occupation_161: Family 1420 Retail and Wholesale Trade Managers 1420.0100 Manager, Wholesale Trade 1224.10 1420.0200 Manager, Retail Trade 1224.20 1420.0300 Manager, Export 1224.30 1420.0400 General Manager, Wholesale Trade/Senior 1304.10 VOLUME I 44 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Occupation_162: Manager, Wholesale Trade 1420.0500 General Manager, Retail Trade, Senior Manager, 1304.20

Occupation_163: Retail Trade 1420.9900 Retail and Wholesale Trade Managers, Other 1304.90

Occupation_164: Managers 1431.0100 General Manager, Recreation and Entertainment 1309.10 1431.9900 Sports, Recreation and Cultural Centre Manager, 1309.90

Occupation_165: Family 1439 Services Manager Not Elsewhere Classified

Occupation_166: Family 2111 Physicists and Astronomers 2111.0100 Physicist, General 2111.10 2111.0200 Physicist, Mechanics 2111.15 2111.0300 Physicist, Heat 2111.20 2111.0400 Physicist, Light 2111.25 2111.0500 Physicist, Sound 2111.30 2111.0600 Physicist, Electricity and Magnetism 2111.35 2111.0700 Physicist, Electronics 2111.40 2111.0800 Physicist, Nuclear 2111.50 VOLUME I 45 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2111.0900 Astronomer 2111.60 2111.1000 Metrologist 2119.10 2111.1100 Material Scientist 2119.20 2111.9900 Physicists and Astronomers, Other 2111.90

Occupation_167: Family 2112 Meteorologists 2112.0100 Meteorologist 2112.10 2112.9900 Meteorologists, Other 2112.90

Occupation_168: Family 2113 Chemists 2113.0100 Chemist, General 2113.10 2113.0200 Chemist, Organic 2113.20 2113.0300 Chemist, Inorganic 2113.30 2113.0400 Chemist, Physical 2113.40 2113.0500 Chemist, Analytical 2113.50 2113.0600 Chemist, Industrial 2113.60 2113.0601 Quality Control Chemist 2113.0621 Lab Chemist – Finished Product Testing 2113.0622 Lab Chemist – Incoming Raw Material Testing 2113.0623 Lab Chemist – Compound Testing – Batch

Occupation_169: Release 2113.0624 Lab Chemist – Cured Compound Testing 2113.0800 Chemist, Forensic Science 2113.80 2113.0901 Quality Assurance Chemist VOLUME I 46 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2113.9900 Chemists, Other 2113.90

Occupation_170: Family 2114 Geologists and Geophysicists 2114.0100 Geologist 2114.10 2114.0200 Petrologists 2114.20 2114.0300 Palaeontologist 2114.30 2114.0400 Geophysicist 2114.40 2114.0500 Hydrologist 2114.50 2114.0600 Mineralogist 2114.60 2114.0700 Seismologist 2114.70 2114.0800 Oceanographer 2114.80 2114.1500 Geologist, Petroleum 2114.15 2114.5500 Hydrographer, Waterworks 2114.55 2114.9900 Geologists and Geophysicists, Other 2114.90

Occupation_171: Group 212 Mathematicians, Actuaries and Statisticians

Occupation_172: Family 2120 Mathematicians, Actuaries and Statisticians 2120.0100 Mathematician 2121.10 2120.0200 Actuary 2121.20 2120.0300 Statistician 2122.10 2120.0400 Statistician, Applied 2122.20 2120.0500 Operation Research Analyst 2122.30 2120.0501 Associate – Analytics 2120.9900 Mathematicians, Actuaries and Statisticians, 2122.90 VOLUME I 47 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Occupation_173: Family 2131 Biologists, Botanists, Zoologists and Related

Occupation_174: Professionals 2131.0100 Biologist, General 2211.10 2131.0200 Marine Biologist 2211.15 2131.0300 Cytologist 2211.20 2131.0400 Botanist, General 2211.35 2131.0500 Economic Botanist 2211.37 2131.0600 Plant Breeder 2211.40 2131.0700 Mycologist 2211.50 2131.0800 Algologist 2211.55 2131.0900 Zoologist, General 2211.60 2131.1000 Entomologist 2211.65 2131.1100 Parasitologist 2211.70 2131.1200 Bacteriologist 2211.85 2131.1300 Chemist, Biological 2212.10 2131.1400 Chemist, Food 2212.20 2131.1500 Plant Pathologist 2212.70 2131.1800 Plant Physiologist 2212.80 2131.9900 Biologists, Botanists, Zoologists and Related 2211.90

Occupation_175: Family 2132 Farming, Forestry and Fisheries Advisors VOLUME I 48 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2132.0100 Agronomist 2213.10 2132.0200 Horticulturist 2213.20 2132.0300 Soil Scientist 2213.30 2132.0400 Soil Conservationist 2213.40 2132.0500 Silviculturist 2213.50 2132.0600 Wood Anatomist 2213.60 2132.0700 Dairy Scientist 2213.70 2132.0800 Poultry Scientist 2213.80 2132.0900 Pisciculturist 2211.80 2132.1000 Farm Overseer, Crop Production 3213.10 2132.9900 Agronomists and Related Professionals, Other 2213.90

Occupation_176: Family 2133 Environmental Protection Professionals 2133.0100 Ecologist 2211.25 2133.0200 Environment Scientist (Including Health) 2211.27 2133.0300 Taxonomist 2211.30 2133.0400 Paleobotanist 2211.45

Occupation_177: Family 2141 Industrial and Production Engineers 2141.0100 Works Inspector, Engineering/Inspection 2149.10

Occupation_178: Engineer 2141.0200 Instrument Engineer/Instrumentation Engineer 2149.15 2141.0300 Industrial Engineer 2149.76 VOLUME I 49 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2141.0301 Industrial Engineer Executive 2141.0400 Packaging Engineer 2149.77 2141.0500 Planning Engineer 2149.78 2141.0501 Production Planning & Control Engineer 2141.0600 Methods Engineer 2149.80 2141.0800 Engineering Estimator/Estimation Engineer 2149.84 2141.0900 Agricultural Engineer 2149.18 2141.1000 Textile Technologist 2149.20 2141.1100 Nuclear Engineer 2149.23 2141.1200 Jute Technologist 2149.25 2141.1300 Fibre Technologist 2149.30 2141.1400 Spinning Master 2149.35 2141.1500 Weaving Master 2149.40 2141.1600 Dyeing and Bleaching Master (Textiles) 2149.45 2141.1700 Printing Master (Textile) 2149.50 2141.1800 Sugar Technologist 2149.55 2141.1900 Dairy Technologist 2149.57 2141.2000 Wood Technologist 2149.60 2141.2100 Leather Technologist 2149.65 2141.2200 Glass Technologist 2149.70 2141.2300 Ceramic Technologist 2149.72 2141.2400 Printing Technologist 2149.74 VOLUME I 50 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2141.2500 Safety Engineer 2149.85 2141.2600 Occupational Health and Safety Specialist 2149.86

Occupation_179: Family 2142 Civil Engineers 2142.0100 Civil Engineer, General 2142.10 2142.0200 Civil Engineer, Building 2142.20 2142.0300 Civil Engineer, Structural 2142.30 2142.0301 Plumbing Site Engineer 2142.0400 Civil Engineer, Irrigation 2142.40 2142.0500 Hydraulic Engineer 2142.45 2142.0501 Fire Protection Systems Design Engineer 2142.0600 Civil Engineer, Highways and Roads 2142.50 2142.0700 Civil Engineer, Railways 2142.60 2142.0800 Airport Engineer 2142.65 2142.0900 Civil Engineer, Public Health 2142.70 2142.0901 Public Health System Design Engineer 2142.1000 Engineer, Waterworks 2142.72 2142.1001 Groundwater Engineer 2142.1002 Wastewater Systems Design 2142.9900 Civil Engineers, Other 2142.90

Occupation_180: Family 2143 Environmental Engineers 2143.0100 Solar Energy System Designer 2149.05 2143.0200 Bio-Medical Engineer 2149.17 VOLUME I 51 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2143.0300 Radiation Protection Engineer 2149.22 2143.0400 Waste Management Engineer, Radioactive 2149.87

Occupation_181: Material 2143.0500 Pollution Control Engineer 2149.88

Occupation_182: Family 2144 Mechanical Engineers 2144.0100 Mechanical Engineer, General 2145.10 2144.0101 Process Design Engineer 2144.0102 Process Try-Out Engineer 2144.0103 Process Try-Out Technician 2144.0104 Process Validation Executive 2144.0105 Manager, Process Engineering 2144.0106 Manager – Product Lifecycle Management 2144.0200 Designer, Machine 2145.15 2144.0201 Designer - Mechanical 2144.0300 Tool Engineer 2145.20 2144.0301 Equipment Designer 2144.0401 Mechanical Engineer, Production 2145.25 2144.0402 Product Conceptualization Engineer 2144.0403 Production Engineer 2144.0500 Mechanical Engineer, Structural 2145.30 2144.0600 Mechanical Engineer, Maintenance 2145.35 2144.0601 Service Engineer – Breakdown Service VOLUME I 52 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2144.0700 Mechanical Engineer, Automobile 2145.40 2144.0701 Prototyping Engineer 2144.0800 Automobile Designer 2145.42 2144.0801 Product Design Manager 2144.0802 Modeller 2144.0803 Product Design Engineer 2144.0804 Prototyping Manager 2144.0900 Mechanical Engineer, Aeronautical 2145.45 2144.1000 Mechanical Engineer, Marine 2145.50 2144.1100 Architect, Naval 2145.55 2144.1200 Mechanical Engineer, Air-Conditioning 2145.60 2144.1301 Layout Engineer 2144.1302 Industrial Engineer (Workstation

Occupation_183: Design) 2144.1401 Service Engineer – Installation 2144.1402 Service Engineer – Installation and

Occupation_184: Commissioning 2144.9900 Mechanical Engineers, Other 2145.90

Occupation_185: Family 2145 Chemical Engineers 2145.0100 Chemical Engineer, General 2146.10 2145.0200 Designer, Chemical Engineering 2146.20 2145.0300 Chemical Engineer, Paints and Varnish 2146.30 VOLUME I 53 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2145.0400 Chemical Engineer, Drugs and Acids 2146.35 2145.0500 Chemical Engineer, Petroleum 2146.40 2145.0600 Chemical Engineer, Fertilizers 2146.45 2145.0700 Chemical Engineer, Food 2146.50 2145.0800 Technologist, Food/Chemical Engineer 2146.55 2145.0900 Technologist, Fuel 2146.60 2145.1000 Oil Technologist 2146.62 2145.1100 Technologist, Paper 2146.68 2145.1200 Technologist, Alcohol 2146.70 2145.1300 Technologist, Rubber 2146.80 2145.1400 Technologist, Plastics 2146.85 2145.9900 Chemical Engineers and Technologists, Other 2146.90

Occupation_186: Family 2146 Mining Engineers, Metallurgists and Related

Occupation_187: Professionals 2146.0100 Mining Engineer, General 2147.10 2146.0200 Mining Engineer, Non-Metals 2147.20 2146.0300 Mining Engineer, Metal 2147.25 2146.0400 Mining Engineer, Petroleum and Gas 2147.30 2146.0500 Metallurgist, Extractive 2147.40 2146.0501 Manager Heat Treatment/Metallurgist 2146.0600 Metallurgists, Adaptive 2147.50 2146.9900 Mining Engineers, Metallurgists and Related 2147.90

Occupation_188: Professionals, Other VOLUME I 54 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Occupation_189: Family 2149 Engineering Professionals Not Elsewhere

Occupation_190: Classified 2149.0100 Engineers and Related Technologists, Other 2149.90

Occupation_191: Family 2151 Electrical Engineers 2151.0100 Electrical Engineer, General 2143.10 2151.0200 Designer, Electrical Engineering 2143.20 2151.0201 Design Engineer 2151.0202 Electrical Design Developer 2151.0300 Electrical Engineer, Generation and Supply 2143.30 2151.0400 Illumination Engineer 2143.40 2151.0403 LED Light Design Engineer 2151.0404 LED Light Design Validation Engineer 2151.0601 System Analyst (PCB Design) 2151.0602 Systems Designer (PCB Design) 2151.0701 Design-For-Manufacture Engineer 2151.9900 Electrical Engineers, Other 2143.90

Occupation_192: Family 2152 Electronics Engineers 2152.0200 Electronic Engineer 2144.60 2152.0301 Stress Analyst/Computer-Aided Test Executive 2144.65 2152.0400 Electro-Optical Engineer 2144.70 2152.0501 Design Engineer VOLUME I 55 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2152.0502 Design-For-Test Engineer 2152.0601 Quality Engineer 2152.0801 Electronic Hardware Design Engineer 2152.0901 Verification Engineer 2152.0902 Testing and Validation Engineer 2152.9900 Electronics Engineers, Other 2144.90

Occupation_193: Family 2153 Telecommunication Engineers 2153.0100 Telecommunication Engineer, General 2144.10 2153.0101 Telecom Terminal Equipment Application

Occupation_194: Developer (Android) 2153.0102 Telecom Terminal Equipment Application (Native

Occupation_195: Applications) 2153.0200 Radio Engineer, Telecommunication 2144.20 2153.0300 Microwave Engineer, Telecommunication 2144.30 2153.0400 Line Communication Engineer, Tele- 2144.40

Occupation_196: Engineer/Technician 2153.0500 Sound Engineer 2144.50 2153.0501 Sound Engineer, Media 2153.0511 Sound Designer 2153.0601 Core Engineer 2153.9900 Telecommunication Engineers, Other

Occupation_197: Group 216 Architects, Planners, Surveyors and Designers VOLUME I 56 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Occupation_198: Family 2161 Building Architects 2161.0100 Architect 2141.10 2161.9900 Building Architects, Other 2141.90

Occupation_199: Family 2163 Product and Garment Designers 2163.0100 Package Designer/Packaging Designer 3471.80 2163.0201 Design Merchandiser 2163.0301 Hand Sketch Designer (Basic) 2163.0400 Furniture Designer 3471.20 2163.0500 Fashion Designer 3471.40 2163.0600 Textile Designer 3471.45

Occupation_200: Family 2164 Town and Traffic Planners 2164.0100 Town Planner 2141.20 2164.0200 Traffic Planner 2141.30

Occupation_201: NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATIONS-2015 (Occupational Description)

Occupation_202: Directorate General of Employment www.ncs.gov.in NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATIONS-2015 (Occupational Description)

Occupation_203: Directorate General of Employment www.ncs.gov.in I i II ii III iii IV iv V v VI vi

Occupation_204: Table of Contents VOL- II A 1. Division 1 1 - 62 2. Division 2 63 - 292 3. Division 3 293 - 479 4. Division 4 480 - 519 5. Division 5 520 - 573 INDEX National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 13 Production and Specialized

Occupation_205: Managers plan, direct, co-ordinate and and Legislators evaluate the overall activities of enterprises, governments and other organizations, or of organizational units Chief Executives, Senior Officials and within them, and formulate and review Legislators formulate and review the their policies, laws, rules and regulations. policies and plan, direct, co-ordinate and Tasks performed by managers usually evaluate the overall activities of include: formulating and advising on the enterprises, governments and other policy, budgets, laws and regulations of organizations with the support of other enterprises, governments and other managers. organizational units; establishing Tasks performed usually include: presiding objectives and standards and formulating over or participating in the proceedings of and evaluating programmes and policies legislative bodies, board of directors and and procedures for their implementation; committees; formulating and advising on ensuring appropriate systems and the policy budgets, laws and regulations procedures are developed and of enterprises, governments and other implemented to provide budgetary organizations; establishing objectives for control; authorising material, human and enterprises, government departments or financial resources to implement policies agencies and other organizations; and programmes. Monitoring and formulating or approving and evaluating evaluating performance of the programmes and policies and procedures organization or enterprise and of its staff; for their implementation; ensuring selecting, or approving the selection of appropriate systems and procedures are staff; ensuring compliance with health and developed and implemented to provide safety requirements; planning and budgetary control; authorising material, directing daily operations; representing human and financial resources to and negotiating on behalf of the implement policies and programmes; government, enterprise or organizational monitoring and evaluating performance of unit managed in meetings and other the organization or enterprise; selecting, forums. or approving the selection of senior staff; performing ceremonial duties and Occupations in this Division are classified representing the enterprise, government, into the following Sub Divisions: organization or community at official occasions and in meetings, negotiations, conventions and public hearings. 11 Chief Executives, Senior Officials and Legislators Occupations in this Sub Division are 12 Administrative and Commercial classified into the following Groups:

Occupation_206: Managers 111 Legislators and Senior Officials VOLUME II A 1 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 112 Managing Directors and Chief Elected Official, Union Government

Occupation_207: Elected Official, Union Government serves in various capacities in legislative and

Occupation_208: Legislators and Senior Officials advisory functions, which include serving as head of the Indian Union; presiding

Occupation_209: Legislators and senior officials determine, over deliberations of Houses of formulate, advise on and direct the

Occupation_210: Parliament; leading council of ministers of implementation of policies of national,

Occupation_211: Union Government; shaping, determining state, regional or local governments or and defining government policies and communities, and of special interest directing their application and execution organizations. They make, ratify, amend through departmental heads; or repeal laws, public rules and representing interests of voters in regulations and plan, organize, direct,

Occupation_212: Parliament, on committees and control and evaluate the overall activities commissions; and taking part in making, of government departments and agencies, amending or repealing laws. Is designated traditional communities and special according to work performed or post held, interest organizations such as: PRESIDENT OF INDIA; RASHTRAPATI. VICE Occupations in this Group are classified PRESIDENT OF INDIA; UP-RASHTRAPATI. into the following Families: SPEAKER, LOK SABHA. CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA. PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA. 1111 Legislators MINISTER, UNION GOVERNMENT. 1112 Senior Government Officials MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT. 1113 Traditional Chiefs and Heads of

Occupation_213: Villages ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 1114 Senior Officials of Special-interest

Occupation_214: Legislators determine, formulate, and Elected Official, State Government serves direct policies of national, state, regional in various capacities in legislative and or local governments and international executive branches of State Government. governmental agencies. They make, ratify, Performs, administrative, executive or amend or repeal laws, public rules and advisory functions, which include leading regulations. They include elected and non- council of ministers of State Government; elected members of parliament, councils shaping, determining and defining and governments. government policies, and directing application and execution of government policies through departmental heads; presiding over deliberations of Houses of 1111.0100

Occupation_215: State Legislatures; committees and VOLUME II A 2 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 commissions; and taking part in making, Code 1111 amending or repealing laws. Is designated Title Legislators according to work performed or post held, such as: CHIEF MINISTER. MINISTER, 1111.9900 STATE GOVERNMENT. CHAIRMAN, Legislators, Other LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL. SPEAKER, LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY. MEMBER,

Occupation_216: Elected Officials, Other include all other LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.

Occupation_217: Elected Officials performing administrative, executive or advisory ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: functions in educational, religious, social,

Occupation_218: Title Legislators organizations and such other permanent or ad-hoc private bodies, not else-where 1111.0300 classified.

Occupation_219: Elected Official, Local Bodies ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_220: Elected Official, Local Bodies serves in Code 1111 various capacities in policy making and Title Legislators executive branches of local bodies.

Occupation_221: Performs administrative, executive or Family 1112 advisory functions in matters entrusted to

Occupation_222: Senior Government Officials local bodies e.g. public health, sanitation, primary education, building and road

Occupation_223: Senior government officials advise construction, drainage, street-lighting, governments on policy matters, oversee raising and collection of admissible local the interpretation and implementation of taxes and their proper administration, and government policies and legislation by all other connected matters for the government departments and agencies, benefit of local people, including represent their country abroad and act on enforcement of local laws and emergency its behalf, or carry out similar tasks in measures as necessary. Is designated intergovernmental organizations. They according to work performed or post held plan, organize, direct, control and such as: MAYOR, MUNICIPAL evaluate the overall activities of municipal CORPORATION. COUNCILLOR, CITY or local, regional and national government MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. CHAIRMAN, departments, boards, agencies or CITY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. commissions in accordance with CHAIRMAN, MUNICIPALITY. MEMBER legislation and policies established by MUNICIPALITY. CHAIRMAN, DISTRICT government and legislative bodies. BOARD. MEMBER, DISTRICT BOARD. CHAIRMAN, CANTONMENT BOARD. MEMBER, CANTONMENT BOARD. 1112.0100 CHAIRMAN, TOWN AREA COMMITTEE. Administrative Official, Union MEMBER, TOWN AREA COMMITTEE. Government CHAIRMAN, BLOCK SAMITI. SARPANCH, PANCHAYAT. MEMBER, PANCHAYAT.

Occupation_224: Government serves in various capacities ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: under Union Government. Performs VOLUME II A 3 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 administrative and advisory functions, Diplomat represents Union of India in which include advising minister on all other countries or at international matters of policy and administration organizations, meetings and conferences. within his sphere of responsibility; Interprets policies of Indian Government organizing and directing work of ministries in foreign countries and advises his and departments; taking policy decisions Government on matters of foreign to extent authorized; supervising relations, trade, commerce, etc. execution and implementation of policies Negotiates and enters into agreements and decisions by field or subordinate with other countries and nations. Issues offices etc. Is designated according to visas to foreigners for visit to India and work performed or post held, such as: looks after welfare of Indians abroad, and MEMBER, OF UNION PUBLIC SERVICE generally promotes interest of his COMMISSION. MEMBER, CENTRAL BOARD country. Is designated according to rank OF REVENUE. MEMBER, RAILWAY BOARD. held or work performed, such as: MEMBER PLANNING COMMISSION. AMBASSADOR HIGH COMMISSIONER SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF ENVOY MINISTER (DIPLOMAT) INDIA JOINT SECRETARY TO THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE COUNSEL GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. DEPUTY GENERAL CHARGE D AFFAIRS TRADE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF COMMISSIONER. INDIA. UNDER SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. DIRECTOR- ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: GENERAL, CIVIL AVIATION. DIRECTOR Code 1112 GENERAL, ALL INDIA RADIO DIRECTOR- Title Senior Government GENERAL, POSTS AND TELEGRAPHS. Officials DIRECTOR-GENERAL, SUPPLIES AND DISPOSALS. DIRECTOR-GENERAL 1112.0300 SHIPPING. DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF

Occupation_225: Executive Officials, Union EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING.

Occupation_226: Government CONTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL. CONTROLLER, IRON AND STEEL.

Occupation_227: Executive Official, Union Government COMMISSIONER, TEXTILE. CUSTODIAN serves in various executive capacities in GENERAL. CHIEF CONTROLLER OF

Occupation_228: Union Government, giving effect to IMPORTS AND EXPORTS. CHIEF policies and decisions of Government. COMMISSIONER, ELECTION. CHIEF

Occupation_229: Performs or supervises performance of COMMISSIONER, LABOUR other executives and field duties such as COMMISSIONER, SALT. REGISTRAR- assessing and collecting revenues; issuing GENERAL, CENSUS. passports, licenses and other authorizations; supervising elections; ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: reconciling parties in trade disputes;

Occupation_230: Title Senior Government enforcing and implementing various rules,

Occupation_231: Officials regulations and provisions of law. Is designated according to work performed 1112.0200 or post held, such as: COMMISSIONER,

Occupation_232: Diplomat DEVELOPMENT COMMISSIONER, INCOME-TAX CUSTODIAN, EVACUEE VOLUME II A 4 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 PROPERTY DIRECTOR OF INSPECTION, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: CUSTOMS DIRECTOR, MARKETING Code 1112 DIRECTOR OF TRAINING, DIRECTOR OF Title Senior Government Officials EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES, REGIONAL 1112.0500 LABOUR COMMISSIONER, COLLECTOR,

Occupation_233: Executive Official, State CENTRAL EXCISE, SUPERINTENDENT,

Occupation_234: Government CUSTOMS, INCOME-TAX OFFICER, SUPERINTENDENT, CENTRAL EXCISE,

Occupation_235: Executive Official, State Government PASSPORT OFFICER, SETTLEMENT serves in various capacities in State OFFICER, CONCILIATION OFFICER

Occupation_236: Government giving effect to policies and (CENTRAL). decisions of Government. Performs or supervises performance of executive and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: field duties which include maintenance of

Occupation_237: Title Senior Government Officials taxes, duties, land revenues, etc.; issuing licenses; executing development schemes; 1112.0400 reconciling parties in trade disputes;

Occupation_238: Administrative Official, State inspecting schools, factories, shops,

Occupation_239: Government offices and establishments; and enforcing various rules, regulations and provisions Administrative Official, State Government of law. Is designated according to work serves in various capacities in State performed or post held, such as:

Occupation_240: Government. Performs administrative and COLLECTOR; DEPUTY COLLECTOR; SUB- advisory functions which include serving DEPUTY COLLECTOR; DEPUTY as Head of State; advising ministers, on all COMMISSIONER. DISTRICT OFFICER; SUB- matters of policy and administration DIVISIONAL OFFICER; LAND RECORD within his sphere of responsibility; OFFICER; TEHSILDAR; SUPERINTENDENT organizing and directing work of OF POLICE CIRCLE OFFICE; SALES-TAX departments; taking policy decisions to OFFICER; SUPERINTENDENT, JAIL; JAILOR, the extent authorised; supervising SUPERINTENDENT OF INDUSTRIES execution and implementation of policies DISTRICT INDUSTRIES OFFICER and decisions by field or subordinate MARKETING OFFICER. RATIONING officers. Is designated according to work OFFICER. SUPPLY OFFICER. RENT performed or post held, such as: CONTROL AND EVICTION OFFICER, GOVERNOR; RAJYAPAL; LIEUTENANT REGIONAL TRANSPORT OFFICER, DISTRICT GOVERNOR MEMBER, STATE PUBLIC PLANNING OFFICER, CO-OPERATIVE SERVICE COMMISSION, MEMBER, BOARD OFFICER, CONCILIATION OFFICER (STATE), OF REVENUE, CHIEF SECRETARY TO PANCHAYAT RAJ OFFICER. GOVERNMENT (STATE), SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT (STATE), DEPUTY ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT (STATE), Code 1112 UNDER SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT Title Senior Government (STATE), CHIEF COMMISSIONER Officials DEVELOPMENT, COMMISSIONER OF DIVISION, DIRECTOR OF EDUCATION, DIRECTOR OF INDUSTRIES. VOLUME II A 5 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 1112.0600 HARYANA URBAN DEVELOPMENT

Occupation_241: Administrative and Executive AUTHORITY, SECRETARY, GHAZIABAD DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.

Occupation_242: Officials, Quasi Government (Central) ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_243: Officials organizes, co-ordinates and controls within authority delegated, activities of 1112.0800 quasi-government organizations, establishment, etc. or one or more of its Administrative and Executive departments/branches or sections; and Officials, Local Bodies includes officials such as: CHAIRMAN, UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION Administrative and Executive Official, CHAIRMAN, COAL MINES WELFARE Local Bodies plans, organizes, co-ordinates COMMISSION, SECRETARY, INDIAN RED and controls functions of the city CROSS SOCIETY, SECRETARY, MICA MINES corporation, improvement trust, LABOUR WELFARE FUND ADVISORY municipality, district board, cantonment COMMITTEE, SECRETARY, RAILWAY RATES board, notified area committee or other TRIBUNAL, CONTROLLER OF EMIGRANT local bodies, and executes and LABOUR, DIRECTOR-GENERAL, implements or supervises execution and EMPLOYEES STATE INSURANCE implementation of decisions, rules and CORPORATION. regulations and by-laws of local bodies and also assesses and collects local taxes. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Is designated according to work

Occupation_244: Title Senior Government COMMISSIONER, CITY CORPORATION,

Occupation_245: Officials EXECUTIVE OFFICER, IMPROVEMENT TRUST; EXECUTIVE OFFICER, 1112.0700 CANTONMENT, BOARD; EXECUTIVE

Occupation_246: Administrative & Executive OFFICER; MUNICIPAL BOARD, SECRETARY, DISTRICT BOARD TAX SUPERINTENDENT,

Occupation_247: Officials, Quasi Government (State) OCTROI SUPERINTENDENT

Occupation_248: Administrative and Executive Official, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_249: Title Senior Government within authority delegated, activities of

Occupation_250: Officials quasi-government organizations, establishments, etc. or one or more of its 1112.9900 departments/branches or sections; and includes officials such as: VICE Senior Government Officials, Other CHANCELLOR, STATE UNIVERSITIES, DEAN, STATE AUTONOMOUS EDUCATIONAL Administrative and Executive Officials, INSTITUTES, CHAIRMAN, STATE Government and Local Bodies, Other CORPORATIONS/BOARDS, CHAIRMAN, Include all other administrative and VOLUME II A 6 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 executive officials of government, quasi- Political Worker takes part in various government or local body, engaged in activities of the political party to which he taking policy decisions and their belongs. Contacts people for propagating implementation, general management ideology of his party and to enquire about and supervision of its one or more their difficulties. Acts as link between branches, sections and departments, not people and legislators. Organizes activities elsewhere classified. of the party in his area. May act as

Occupation_251: President or Secretary of his party. May ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: also function as President of Panchayat or

Occupation_252: Title Senior Government ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_253: Traditional Chiefs and Heads of Villages Workers and Other Economic perform a variety of legislative,

Occupation_254: Interest Organizations administrative and ceremonial tasks and duties, determined by ancient traditions, Senior Officials of Employers’, workers’ as well as by the division of rights and and other economic-interest organizations responsibilities between village chiefs and determine and formulate policies, rules the local, regional and national and regulations of their respective authorities. organizations, direct their application, represents these organizations and act on

Occupation_255: Senior Officials of Special-interest Title Senior Officials of Special-interest

Occupation_256: Organizations determine, formulate and Organizations direct the implementation of policies of special-interest organizations, such as 1114.0300 political-party organizations, trade unions, Director, Disaster Management employers' organizations, trade and

Occupation_257: Services industry associations, humanitarian or charity organizations, or sports

Occupation_258: Director, Disaster Management Services associations, and represent their directs and co-ordinates regional organizations and act on their behalf. programme activities of various agency to 1114.0100 provide specialized human services, such Political Worker as water safety programmes, disaster relief, and emergency transportation:

Occupation_259: Consults with co-operating agencies, such VOLUME II A 7 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 as police, firefighters and emergency Managing Directors and Chief ambulance services to co-ordinate efforts Executives and define areas of jurisdiction.

Occupation_260: Participates in programme activities to formulate and review the policies, plan, serve clients of agency. Prepares budgets direct, co-ordinate and evaluate the to control costs and to allocate funds in overall activities of enterprises or accordance with provisions and agency organizations (except special interest charter. May instruct agency staff and organizations and government volunteers in skills required to provide departments) with the support of other services. May forward requisitions and managers, usually within guidelines arrange for maintenance of equipment, established by a Board of Directors or a such as two way radios and agency governing body to whom they are vehicles. May co-ordinate services to answerable for the operations undertaken disaster victims and safety programmes, and their result. such as water safety and emergency first aid, and also co-ordinates transportation Occupations in this Group are classified of agency clients, blood and medical into the following Families: supplies and equipment. 1120 Managing Directors and Chief ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_261: Organizations, Other Managing Directors and Chief Executives formulate and review the policies and plan, direct co-ordinate and evaluate the

Occupation_262: Senior Officials of Humanitarian and other overall activities of enterprises or

Occupation_263: Special-interest Organizations, Other organizations (except special interest include senior officials of humanitarian organizations and government and other special-interest organizations departments). They work with the support who determine and formulate policies, of other managers, usually within rules and regulations of humanitarian guidelines established by a Board of organizations, sports associations or other

Occupation_264: Directors or a governing body to whom special-interest organizations. Directs they are answerable for the operations their application, represents these undertaken and their result. organizations and acts on their behalf. 1120.0100 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Working Proprietor, Electricity

Occupation_265: Title Senior Officials of Special-interest Organizations Working Proprietor, Electricity plans, organizes and controls in broad outline, within authority delegated, activities of

Occupation_266: Group 112 private or public organizations or VOLUME II A 8 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 establishments or one or more of its 1120.0400 branches, departments, etc. engaged in Director, Electricity generation, transmission and distribution of electricity to domestic and industrial

Occupation_267: Director, Electricity heads the organization consumers. Is designated according to and is supported by more than one work performed or powers exercised. manager. Determines, plans, organizes and controls in broad outline, within ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: authority delegated, activities of private

Occupation_268: Code 1120 or public organizations or establishments

Occupation_269: Title Managing Directors and Chief or one or more of its branches,

Occupation_270: Executives departments, etc. engaged in generation, transmission and distribution of electricity 1120.0200 to domestic and industrial consumers. Is Working Proprietor, Gas designated according to work performed or powers exercised. Working Proprietor, Gas plans, organizes and controls, within authority delegated ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: activities of public or private organizations Code 1120 or enterprises, or one or more of its Title Managing Directors and Chief departments, sections or branches, Executives engaged in manufacture of gas, distribution and supply of gas to 1120.0500 consumers and production and supply of Director, Gas steam for heat and power. Is designated according to work performed or powers

Occupation_271: Director, Gas heads the organization and exercised. is supported by more than one manager.

Occupation_272: Determines, plans, organizes and controls, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: within authority delegated activities of

Occupation_273: Title Managing Directors and Chief enterprises, or one or more of its

Occupation_274: Executives departments, sections or branches, engaged in manufacture of gas, 1120.0300 distribution and supply of gas to Working Proprietor, Water Supply consumers and production and supply of steam for heat and power. Is designated according to work performed or powers Working Proprietor, Water Supply plans, exercised. organizes and co-ordinates, within authority delegated, activities of public or ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: private organizations engaged in storage, filtration, purification and supply of water. Code 1120

Occupation_275: Title Managing Directors and Chief ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Executives 1120.0600

Occupation_276: Title Managing Directors and Chief Director, Water Supply

Occupation_277: Executives VOLUME II A 9 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1

Occupation_278: Director, Water Supply heads the ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: organization and is supported by more Code 1120 than one manager. Determines, plans, Title Managing Directors and Chief organizes and co-ordinates, within Executives authority delegated, activities of public or private organizations engaged in storage, 1120.0900 filtration, purification and supply of water. Working Proprietor,

Occupation_279: Mines/Proprietor, Mines ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_280: Title Managing Directors and Chief organizes, directs and controls the

Occupation_281: Executives enterprise wholly or partially and is engaged in economic activities related to 1120.0700 extraction of coal, ore, mica, precious

Occupation_282: Director, Bank stones and other minerals from underground mines or open pits, and

Occupation_283: Director, Bank sets broad policies and treatment of minerals for use by plans and supervises in general way, consumers. Is designated according to within authority delegated, efficient mineral extracted such as: WORKING operation of private or public bank or PROPRIETOR, GOLD MINE, WORKING major segment of it. May be designated PROPRIETOR, DIAMOND MINE, WORKING according to authority delegated or work PROPRIETOR, COAL MINE, WORKING performed such as: GOVERNOR (BANK), PROPRIETOR, IRON MINE, WORKING CHAIRMAN (BANK), MANAGING PROPRIETOR, MANGANESE, MINE DIRECTOR (BANK). WORKING PROPRIETOR, COPPER MINE WORKING PROPRIETOR, MICA MINE. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_284: Director, Insurance sets broad policies, Quarry/Proprietor, Quarry plans and co-ordinates within authority delegated, activities of private or public Working Proprietor, Quarry plans, organization, or major segment of it, organizes, directs and controls the dealing in life, fire, accident, marine and enterprise, wholly or partially and is other general insurance business. Is engaged in economic activities related to designated according to work performed extraction of stone, slate, sand and clay or authority exercised, such as: from earth. Is designated according to the CHAIRMAN, LIFE INSURANCE material quarried such as: CORPORATION, MANAGING DIRECTOR, WORKING PROPRIETOR, STONE QUARRY, (INSURANCE), DIRECTOR, INVESTMENTS WORKING PROPRIETOR, SLATE QUARRY. (INSURANCE). VOLUME II A 10 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_285: Title Managing Directors and Chief Title Managing Directors and Chief

Occupation_286: Executives Executives 1120.1100 1120.1300 Working Proprietor, Well Director, Construction

Occupation_287: Director, Construction plans, co-ordinates Working Proprietor, Well Drilling plans, and controls, within powers delegated, organizes, directs and controls the activities of public or private organizations enterprise wholly or partially and is or one or more of its branches or engaged in economic activities related to departments engaged in construction, drilling and sinking of deep wells, and maintenance and repairs of buildings, operating wells for extraction of crude roads, bridges, railway tracks, petroleum, natural gas, water and other aerodromes, canals, dams, etc. Is liquids and semi-liquids from deep below designated according to work performed earth’s surface. or authority exercised such as:

Occupation_288: Is designated according to the type of well MANAGING DIRECTOR(CONSTRUCTION). such as: PROJECT DIRECTOR(CONSTRUCTION). WORKING PROPRIETOR, OIL WELL. WORKING PROPRIETOR, GAS WELL. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: WORKING PROPRIETOR, WATER WELL. Code 1120

Occupation_289: Title Managing Directors and Chief ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Executives

Occupation_290: Director, Mine plans, directs and co- Working Proprietor, ordinates, within powers delegated

Occupation_291: Construction/Proprietor, activities of public or private organizations

Occupation_292: Construction engaged in extracting coal, ores, mica, precious stones and other solid minerals from underground mines or open pits and Working Proprietor, Construction in treating and dressing ore or minerals at formulates policies, plans, organizes and mine site. Is designated according to work controls activities of the organization or performed or powers delegated such as: enterprise, wholly or partially., Is engaged MANAGING DIRECTOR (MINES). in construction, maintenance and repair DIRECTOR, SALES (MINES). of buildings, roads, bridges, railway tracks, aerodromes, canals, dams, etc. Is ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: designated as: CONTRACTOR, BUILDING CONSTRUCTION. Code 1120 CONTRACTOR, CANAL CONSTRUCTION, Title Managing Directors and Chief etc. Executives VOLUME II A 11 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 1120.1500 Working Proprietor, Manufacturing plans

Occupation_293: Director, Quarry organizes, co-ordinates and controls activities of enterprises wholly or partially and is engaged in producing, maintaining

Occupation_294: Director, Quarry plans, directs and co- or repairing capital and consumer goods ordinates, within powers delegated, excluding crops, minerals, electricity and activities of public or private organization natural gas. Is designated according to the engaged in excavating stone, slate, clay industry owned and controlled, such as: and sand from earth. Is designated WORKING PROPRIETOR, TEXTILE MILLS, according to work performed or powers WORKING PROPRIETOR, ENGINEERING exercised such as: MANAGING DIRECTOR, WORKSHOP. WORKING PROPRIETOR, QUARRY, DIRECTOR, STONE QUARRY. SHOE FACTORY, WORKING PROPRIETOR, DIRECTOR, MARBLE QUARRY. DIRECTOR, GLASS FACTORY. WORKING PROPRIETOR, LIMESTONE QUARRY. STEEL ROLLING MILLS WORKING PROPRIETOR PRINTING PRESS, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: WORKING PROPRIETOR,

Occupation_295: Title Managing Directors and Chief WORKING PROPRIETOR, BAKERY.

Occupation_296: Director, Well Drilling plans, directs and co-ordinates, within powers delegated, 1120.1800 activities of public or private organization

Occupation_297: Director Manufacturing engaged in drilling and sinking deep wells and operating wells for extraction of

Occupation_298: Director, Manufacturing plans, organizes, mineral oil, natural gas, etc. Is designated co-ordinates and controls within authority according to work performed or economic delegated, activities of private or public activity directed, such as: MANAGING organizations, or one or more of its DIRECTOR, OIL WELL, MANAGING departments or branches, engaged in DIRECTOR, GAS WELL, DIRECTOR, OIL producing, maintaining or repairing capital WELL, DIRECTOR, GAS WELL. or consumer goods, excluding crops, minerals, electricity and natural gas. Is ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: designated according to work performed,

Occupation_299: Title Managing Directors and Chief directed such as: MANAGING DIRECTOR,

Occupation_300: Executives (MANUFACTURING). DIRECTOR, PRODUCTION(MANUFACTURING). 1120.1700 DIRECTOR, WORKS(MANUFACTURING). Working Proprietor, DIRECTOR, STEEL PLANT. DIRECTOR,

Occupation_301: Manufacturing/Proprietor, TANNERY. DIRECTOR, BAKERY. DIRECTOR,

Occupation_302: Manufacturing SADDLERY. VOLUME II A 12 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: may delegate financial and operational

Occupation_303: Title Managing Directors and Chief permit from public authorities for retail

Occupation_304: Executives trade. 1120.1900 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Working Proprietor, Wholesale Code 1120

Occupation_305: Executives Working Proprietor, Wholesale Trade 1120.2100 purchases goods in bulk and sells them to

Occupation_306: Director, Wholesale Trade retailers or other large consumers for profit. Lays down and controls business policies to ensure profits, keeping in view Director, Wholesale Trade lays down price line, market trend and demand and policies within powers ,delegated, and supply position. Appoints Directors, plans, controls and directs operation of

Occupation_307: Managers and Representatives and private or public enterprise or segment of delegates financial and operational its activities engaged in buying and selling powers to them, if necessary. Runs of goods in wholesale. Is designated wholesale trade on monopoly or zonal according to work performed, such as: basis in specific commodities either by MANAGING DIRECTOR (Wholesale Trade). importing them from outside or CHAIRMAN, BOARD OF DIRECTORS manufacturing them in his own or other (Wholesale Trade). concern. May require a licence or permit from public authorities for wholesale ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: trade. May undertake export business. Code 1120

Occupation_308: Executives Director, Retail Trade 1120.2000 Director, Retail Trade lays down policies Working Proprietor, Retail within powers delegated and plans,

Occupation_309: Trade/Proprietor, Retail Trade controls and directs operation of private or public enterprises or a segment of its activities, engaged in buying and selling Working Proprietor, Retail Trade conducts goods in retail. Is designated according to business in retail trade on own account, work performed such as: MANAGING buying merchandise from manufacturers DIRECTOR (Retail Trade), CHAIRMAN, or wholesalers according to public BOARD OF DIRECTORS (Retail Trade) demand and sells them to customers for DIRECTOR-IN-CHARGE (Retail Trade). profit. Lays down business policies regarding margin of profit and compliance ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: with prescribed rules and regulations.

Occupation_310: May appoint Directors and Managers and Code 1120 VOLUME II A 13 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1

Occupation_311: Title Managing Directors and Chief SUPERINTENDENT(RAILWAYS). CHIEF

Occupation_312: Executives COMMERCIAL SUPERINTENDENT(RAILWAYS). 1120.2300 Working Proprietor, Transport ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_313: Code 1120 Working Proprietor, Transport plans, Title Managing Directors and Chief organizes, co-ordinates and controls Executives activities of the organization or establishment wholly or partly owned by 1120.2500 him, is engaged in transporting Director, Communication passengers and freight by buses, trucks, taxis, rickshaws, tongas, and other means Director, Communication plans, organizes, of road transport; by boats, launches, co-ordinates and controls, within ships, etc. plying on inland or coastal authority delegated, activities of public or waters or on high seas; by aircraft for private organization or one or more of its providing transport and other services, departments or branches, engaged in incidental to transport. providing postal, telephone, telegraph, wireless and other communication ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: services. Is designated according to

Occupation_314: Title Managing Directors and Chief communication service directed such as:

Occupation_315: Executives DIRECTOR, POSTAL SERVICES, POST MASTER GENERAL. DIRECTOR, OVERSEAS 1120.2400 COMMUNICATION SERVICES. DIRECTOR

Occupation_316: Director, Transport OF TELEPHONES, DIRECTOR OF RAILWAY MAIL SERVICE.

Occupation_317: Director, Transport plans organizes, co- ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ordinates and controls, within authority delegated, activities of private or public Code 1120 organizations or one or more of its Title Managing Directors and Chief departments, branches or sections, Executives engaged in transporting passengers and freight by railways, tramways, buses, 1120.2600 trucks, taxis, rickshaws, animal transport Director, Airport and other means of road transport; by Director, Airport plans, directs, and co- boats, launches and ships plying on rivers, ordinates, through subordinate personnel, coastal waters, and high seas; by aircrafts; activities concerned with construction and and operating services incidental to maintenance of airport facilities and transport. Is designated according to work operation of airport in accordance with performed, powers exercised of service governmental agencies or commission controlled, such as: MANAGING DIRECTOR policies and regulations. Consults with (TRANSPORT). commission members, governmental DIRECTOR, TRAFFIC GENERAL, MANAGER, officials, or representatives of airlines to RAILWAYS, DIRECTOR, ROADWAYS, CHIEF discuss and plan matters, such as design OPERATING and development of airport facilities, VOLUME II A 14 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 formulation of operating rules, Working Proprietor, Storage and regulations, and procedures, and aircraft Warehousing plans and organizes storage landing, taxiing, and take-off patterns for warehousing and freight handling services various types of aircrafts. Negotiates with to public and private organizations by representatives of airlines, land, sea or air and arranges allied utility companies, or individuals for transport and communication facilities to acquisition of property for development parties concerned. Obtains license from of airports, lease of airport buildings and Government where necessary, and lays facilities, or use of rights-of-way over down business policies. Appoints private property. Formulates procedures Directors, Agents and Managers and for use in event of aircraft accidents, fires, delegates required financial and other or other emergencies. Inspects airport powers to them to ensure smooth running facilities, such as runways, buildings, of business, desired margin of profit and beacons and lighting, and automotive or compliance with business terms and construction equipment, or reviews Government rules and regulations. inspection reports, to determine repairs, replacement, or improvements required. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_318: Co-ordinates activities of personnel Code 1120 involved in repair and maintenance of Title Managing Directors and Chief airport facilities, buildings, and equipment Executives to minimize interruption of airport operations and improve efficiency. Directs 1120.2800 personnel in investigating violations of

Occupation_319: Director, Storage and Warehousing aerial or ground traffic regulations, reviews investigation reports, and initiates

Occupation_320: Director, Storage and Warehousing plans, actions to be taken against violators. organizes, co-ordinates and controls,

Occupation_321: Directs studies on noise abatement within authority delegated, activities of resulting from complaints of excessive public or private organizations, or one or noise from low flying aircraft or other more of its branches, engaged in operations. Reviews reports of providing storage and warehouse facilities expenditures for previous fiscal year, on prescribed terms and conditions to proposes improvements to facilitate,

Occupation_322: Government and private parties. May estimated increase in volume of traffic, in arrange facilities of transport and order to prepare budget estimates for communication as required. upcoming fiscal year. Represents airport

Occupation_323: May specialize in any particular type of before civic or other organizational item or commodity such as groups, courts, boards, and commissions. machinery and engineering items, explosives, perishable goods, etc. and be ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: designated accordingly.

Occupation_324: Title Managing Directors and Chief ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_325: Warehousing VOLUME II A 15 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 1120.2900 Executive Chef Working Proprietor, Lodging and

Occupation_326: Catering Services Executive Chef co-ordinates activities and directs indoctrination and training of CHEFS, COOKS; and other kitchen workers Working Proprietor, Lodging and Catering engaged in preparing and cooking food in

Occupation_327: Services plans, organizes, co-ordinates hotels or restaurants to ensure an and controls operations of the efficient and profitable food service. Plans organization or establishment wholly or or participates in planning menus and partly owned by him and is engaged in utilisation of food surpluses and leftovers, serving food, drinks and beverages and taking into account probable number of providing lodging and camping facilities to guests, marketing conditions, popularity public. Included are: WORKING of various dishes, and decency of menu. PROPRIETOR, HOTEL. WORKING

Occupation_328: Estimates food consumption and purchase PROPRIETOR, RESTAURANT. WORKING or requisition of foodstuff and kitchen PROPRIETOR, CAFE WORKING supplies. Reviews menus, analyses PROPRIETOR, COFFEE HOUSE. recipes, determines food, labour, and overhead costs, and assigns price to menu ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: items. Directs food apportionment policy

Occupation_329: Title Managing Directors and Chief other kitchen personnel and co-ordinates

Occupation_330: Executives their assignments to ensure economical and timely food production. Observes 1120.3000 methods of food preparation and cooking,

Occupation_331: Director, Lodging and Catering size of portions, and garnishing of food to

Occupation_332: Services/Director Food and ensure food is prepared in prescribed

Occupation_333: Beverage Service manner. Tests cooked food by tasting and smelling them. Devises special dishes and

Occupation_334: Director, Lodging and Catering Services develops recipes. Hires and discharges plans, organizes and controls, within employees. Familiarizes newly hired authority delegated, activities of public or CHEFS and COOKS with practices of the private organizations or establishments or restaurant kitchen and oversees training one or more of its branches, engaged in of COOK APPRENTICES. Maintains time preparing and serving food, drinks and and payroll records. Establishes and beverages and providing lodging, and enforces nutrition and sanitation camping facilities to public. Included are: standards for the restaurant. May DIRECTOR, HOTEL. supervise or co-operate with DIRECTOR, RESTAURANT. STEWARD/STEWARDESS in matters DIRECTOR, COFFEE HOUSE. pertaining to kitchen, pantry, and storeroom. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_335: Executives 1120.3100 VOLUME II A 16 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 1120.3200 and circus shows; organizing and Working Proprietor, Recreation and presenting radio and television programmes; operating carnivals and

Occupation_336: Entertainment amusement parks; organizing games, sports, hunting, fishing, excursion, Working Proprietor, Recreation and competitions, etc., and providing other

Occupation_337: Entertainment plans, organizes, co- entertainment and recreation services. ordinates and controls operations of the

Occupation_338: Included are; organization or establishment wholly or DIRECTOR, MOTION PICTURE. DIRECTOR, partly owned by him and is engaged in STAGE. DIRECTOR, STUDIO. DIRECTOR, producing, distributing and exhibiting STADIUM. DIRECTOR, RADIO STATION. motion pictures; producing and presenting stage and circus shows; ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: operating carnivals and amusement parks;

Occupation_339: Code 1120 organizing games, sports, hunting, fishing,

Occupation_340: Title Managing Directors and Chief excursion, competitions, etc., and

Occupation_341: Executives providing other entertainment and recreation services. Included are: WORKING PROPRIETOR, FILM STUDIO. 1120.3400 PRODUCER, MOTION PICTURES, FILM Station Director, Radio/TV DISTRIBUTOR, WORKING PROPRIETOR, THEATRE, WORKING PROPRIETOR, Station Director, Radio/TV directs and co- CARNIVAL, WORKING PROPRIETOR, ordinates activities of radio or television AMUSEMENT PARK. WORKING station, or of cable television franchise. PROPRIETOR, GYMNASIUM, WORKING Supervises directly, or through PROPRIETOR, SWIMMING POOL, subordinates, personnel engaged in WORKING PROPRIETOR, DANCE HALL, departments, such as sales, programme or WORKING PROPRIETOR, CINEMA, engineering. WORKING PROPRIETOR, CIRCUS. Observes activities to ensure compliance with government regulations. Discusses ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: plans with the marketing personnel to

Occupation_342: Title Managing Directors and Chief periods to advertisers and their agencies.

Occupation_343: Executives Confers with owners or company senior management to discuss station policies 1120.3300 and administrative procedures. May

Occupation_344: Director, Recreation and prepare operational budget and monitor expenses for station or franchise. May

Occupation_345: Entertainment negotiate with motion picture companies for purchase of independent film

Occupation_346: Director, Recreation and Entertainment programmes. plans, organizes and controls, within

Occupation_347: May negotiate cable franchise contract authority delegated, activities of public or with local issuing authority. May develop private organizations or establishments or strategies to promote sales of new cable one or more of its branches or television service or upgraded service to departments, engaged in producing, customers within the franchise area. May distributing and exhibiting motion contact prospective buyers of station time pictures; producing and presenting stage VOLUME II A 17 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 to promote sale of station services. May NSQF Level 8 manage stations engaged in transmitting broadcasts to foreign countries and be ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: known as Director, International Code 1120

Occupation_348: Broadcasting (radio-television broadcast). Title Managing Directors and Chief May perform different duties and Executives responsibilities, according to station size and network affiliation. 1120.3500 Working Proprietor, Other Services ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_349: Code 1120 Working Proprietor, Other Services plans,

Occupation_350: Title Managing Directors and Chief organizes, co-ordinates and controls

Occupation_351: Executives activities of the organization, wholly or partly owned by him, and is engaged in 1120.3401 running and managing educational

Occupation_352: Account Director (Advertising institutions; rendering medical and other

Occupation_353: Agency) health services, sanitation, washing and cleaning households, garments, etc. and

Occupation_354: Account Director (Advertising Agency) is providing other services. responsible for managing the clients’ advertisement portfolio. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_355: Qualification Pack Details: Title Managing Directors and Chief

Occupation_356: Executives QP NOS Reference MES/Q0207 QP NOS Name Account Director 1120.3600 (Advertising

Occupation_357: Director, Other Services plans, organizes ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and controls, within authority delegated,

Occupation_358: Code 1120 activities of public or private organizations

Occupation_359: Title Managing Directors and Chief or establishments, or one or more of its

Occupation_360: Executives departments or branches, engaged in running educational institutions; 1120.3402 rendering medical sanitation and other health services. Organizing and providing

Occupation_361: Sales Director (Media Org) religious services, promoting welfare of workers or community, giving charity

Occupation_362: Sales Director (Media Org) is responsible assistance or aid to infirm or orphans. for leading the sales efforts of a media

Occupation_363: Organizing and managing trade and labour and entertainment company. organizations and other civic and social associations, washing and cleaning

Occupation_364: Qualification Pack Details: garments etc., undertaking and cremating; QP NOS Reference MES/Q0201 and performing other services. Included QP NOS Name Sales Director are: DIRECTOR OF EDUCATIONAL (Media Org) INSTITUTIONS. DIRECTOR OF CHARITABLE VOLUME II A 18 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 INSTITUTIONS, DIRECTOR, ORPHANAGE institutional programmes, and approves DIRECTOR, Y.M.C.A, DIRECTOR, Y.W.C.A. materials or suggests changes. Instructs classes in institution's education ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: programme or as guest lecturer at the

Occupation_365: Code 1120 university. Writes articles for technical

Occupation_366: Title Managing Directors and Chief journals or other publications.

Occupation_367: Executives ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 1120.3700 Code 1120

Occupation_368: Director, Museum/Zoo Title Managing Directors and Chief

Occupation_369: Director, Museum/Zoo administers affairs 1120.3800 of museum, zoo, or similar establishments. Confers with the Chief Librarian institution's board of Directors to formulate policies and plan overall Chief Librarian plans and administers operations. Directs acquisition, education, programme of library services: Submits research, public service, and recommendations on library policies and developmental activities of the institution, services to the governing body, such as consulting with curatorial, administrative, board of Directors or board of Trustees, and maintenance staff members to and implements policy decisions. implement policies and initiate Analyses, selects, and executes programmes. Works with members of recommendations of personnel, such as curatorial and administrative staffs to department chiefs or branch supervisors. acquire additions to collections. Confers Co-ordinates activities of the branch or with administrative staff members to departmental libraries. Analyses and co- determine budget requirements, plans ordinates departmental budget estimates fund raising drives, prepares applications and controls expenditures to administer for grants from government agencies or approved budget. Reviews and evaluates private foundations, and solicits financial orders for books and audio-visual support for institutions. Establishes and materials. Examines trade publications maintains contact with administrators of and materials, interviews publishers' other institutions to exchange information representatives, and consults with others concerning operations and plan, co- to select materials. Administers personnel ordinate, or consolidate community regulations, interviews and appoints job service and education programmes. applicants and promotes and discharges

Occupation_370: Represents the institution at professional employees. Plans and conducts staff and civic social events, conventions, and meetings and participates in community other gatherings to strengthen and professional meetings to discuss and relationships with cultural and civic act on library problems. Delivers book leaders, present lectures or participate in reviews and lectures to publicise library seminars, or explain institution's functions activities and services. Provides library and seek financial support for projects. public relation services. May examine and

Occupation_371: Reviews materials prepared by staff select materials to be discarded, repaired, members, such as articles for journals, or replaced. requests for grants and reports on VOLUME II A 19 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 1120.9900

Occupation_372: Title Managing Directors and Chief Executives, Others

Occupation_373: Executives Working Proprietors and Directors, Other 1120.3900 Workers plan, organize, control, co-

Occupation_374: Principal, College ordinate and supervise activities of public or private organizations, wholly or

Occupation_375: Principal College directs and co-ordinates partially owned by them or on behalf of educational, administrative, and others, engaged in generating, counselling activities of college. Develops transmitting and distributing electricity; and evaluates educational programmes to producing and supplying gas, purifying ensure conformance to state and and supplying water and providing related university standards. Develops and co- services not elsewhere classified. ordinates educational programmes through meetings with staff, review of ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: teachers' activities, and issuance of directives.

Occupation_376: Title Managing Directors and Chief parents concerning educational and

Occupation_377: Sub Division 12 with colleges, community organizations, and other colleges to co-ordinate

Occupation_378: Administrative and Commercial educational, sports and cultural services.

Occupation_379: Forwards requisitions and allocates supplies, equipment, and instructional material as needed. Directs preparation of Administrative and Commercial Managers class schedules, cumulative records, and plan, organize, direct, control and co- attendance reports. Observes and ordinate the financial, administrative, evaluates teacher’s performance. human resource, policy, planning,

Occupation_380: Interviews and hires teachers. Walks research and development, advertising, around the college building and property public relations, and sales and marketing to monitor safety and security. Plans and activities of enterprises and organizations, monitors college budget and financial or of enterprises that provide such matters. May plan and direct building services to other enterprises and maintenance. May develop and organizations. administer educational programmes for Tasks performed by workers in this sub- students with mental or physical major group usually include: formulating handicaps. and administering policy advice, strategic and financial planning; establishing and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: directing operational and administrative

Occupation_381: Title Managing Directors and Chief and evaluating strategies and policies;

Occupation_382: Executives providing advice to Senior Managers; directing the development of initiatives VOLUME II A 20 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 for new products, marketing, public 1213 Policy and Planning Managers relations and advertising campaigns; 1219 Business Services and determining and directing sales activities,

Occupation_383: Administration Managers Not product mix, customer service standards;

Occupation_384: Elsewhere Classified setting prices and credit arrangements; ensuring compliance with relevant

Occupation_385: Family 1211 legislation, regulations and standards;

Occupation_386: Finance Managers controlling selection, training and performance of staff; preparing budgets and overseeing financial operations; Finance Managers plan, direct and co- consulting with the chief executive and ordinate the financial operations of an with managers of other departments or enterprise or organization, in consultation sections; controlling expenditure and with Senior Managers and with Managers ensuring the efficient use of resources; of other departments or sections. representing the enterprise or organization in negotiations, and at 1211.0100 conventions, seminars, public hearings

Occupation_387: General Manager, Bank organizes, Occupations in this Sub Division are controls and supervises, within authority classified into the following Groups: delegated, activities of a private or public bank or one or more of its departments or 121 Business Services and branches. Is designated according to Administration Managers authority delegated or work performed 122 Sales, Marketing and Development such as: AGENT (BANK) SUB-AGENT

Occupation_388: General Manager, Insurance organizes, and co-ordinate the financial, controls and supervises, within authority administrative, human resource, policy, delegated, activities of a private or public planning, activities of organizations, or of organization or one or more of its enterprises that provide such services to departments or branches, engaged in life, other enterprises and organizations. fire, accident, marine and other general insurance business. Occupations in this Group are classified into the following Families: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 1211 Finance Managers Code 1211

Occupation_389: Title Finance Managers 1212 Human Resource Managers VOLUME II A 21 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Division 1 1211.0300 enterprises that provide human resource

Occupation_390: Purser, Ship services to other enterprises and organizations.

Occupation_391: Purser, Ship deals with correspondence 1212.0100 and accounts relating to a ship. Keeps charge of all accounts and pay of the Personnel Manager ship's personnel. Checks reports of Clerks and pays of crew and maintains their pay Personnel Manager; Personnel Officer; rolls. Prepares portage bills and ship's 30 Industrial Relation Officer formulates and articles (contracts). Collects mail and executes policies relating to recruitment, distributes to passengers, officers and training, review of terms and conditions of crew. May supervise stowing or removal employment of personnel, of luggage from holds in conjunction with implementation of statutory and other

Occupation_392: Chief Officer, Ship or Officer on Watch. welfare schemes and effective utilization

Occupation_393: May collect valuables of passengers for and discharge of personnel employed in safe custody in passenger ships. May any undertaking. Advises and assists in arrange parties and other entertainment development of managerial power, for passengers and generally acts as a prescribes recruitment methods, host. organizes training schemes, supervises ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: administration of welfare programmes,

Occupation_394: Code 1211 distributes personnel for their effective

Occupation_395: Title Finance Managers utilization in organization and resolves problems of remuneration, discipline and 1211.9900 industrial disputes in accordance with established laws. Investigates in to specific

Occupation_396: Finance and Administration problems of indiscipline and inefficiency

Occupation_397: Managers, Others to evolve and suggest ameliorative measures to management. Establishes

Occupation_398: Finance and Administration Department channels of consultation between labour

Occupation_399: Managers, Others include Managers and employers to minimize engaged in finance and administration misunderstanding, promote cordial and related services, not elsewhere relations and consults with labour classified. representatives on behalf of employers to remove causes of petty grievances. May ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: specialize in a particular function, such as

Occupation_400: Title Finance Managers welfare, or industrial relations and be designated accordingly.

Occupation_401: NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATIONS-2015 (Occupational Description)

Occupation_402: Directorate General of Employment www.ncs.gov.in NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATIONS-2015 (Occupational Description)

Occupation_403: Directorate General of Employment www.ncs.gov.in FOREWORD National Classification of Occupation (NCO) plays a very vital role in maintaining standards of occupation in the country and is regularly used in the network of employment exchanges that constitute the Public Employment Service for Classification of Occupations, job postings and job search. This classification is used in all types of censuses and sample surveys conducted in India especially in data collection, processing, analysis and presentation of survey results besides its wide range of applications in policy formulation and policy analysis. The Directorate General of Employment, Ministry of Labour & Employment,

Occupation_404: Government of India is responsible for maintaining and updating the National Classification of Occupation in India aligned with the corresponding International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) of ILO. The first classification was NC0-1946 followed by NC0-1958, NC0- 1968, NC0-2004 and now the current series NC0-2015. The National Classification of Occupations-2015 (NC0-2015) is aligned with International Standard Classification of Occupations-2008 (ISC0-2008). 2. NCO is a classification of occupations which describes and assigns codes to the various occupations in the country and aligns it with the ISCO. These codes are reviewed and updated periodically to reflect developments in the labour market, particularly with the emergence of new occupations, as well as to align with changes in the international standard. These codes also help in promoting international comparability of statistical data relating to occupations. These occupational standards follow a scientific and hierarchical approach having major, minor and unit groups of classification which has evolved over the years to capture the structural changes in the employment market and current work practices and work environment. 3. The NC0-2015 is a compendium for occupational information available in the Indian economy. The document gives an insight into the occupational framework, nature of duties involved and the level of skill requirement to perform the activities in a real time work situation. The users of NCO may make use of the information for vocational guidance, career counselling and various surveys and studies undertaken by user agencies. The NC0-2015 has also been mapped with the National Industrial Classification (NIC) and Qualification Packs National Occupational Standards (QP-NOS) to cater to the structural changes in the labour market. Furthermore, NC0-2015 framework is dynamic enough to capture and reflect the newly emerging occupations in the industry. 4. The current volume of NCO details out the job description of 3600 civilian occupations covering 52 sectors, as compared to the earlier series of NCO i.e. NC0-2004, which contained the job descriptions for 2945 occupations. The NC0-2015 has 8 digit coding structure which was mapped and aligned to ISC0-2008 with the addition of 2 digits. There is one to one correspondence between ISC0-2008 and the NC0-2015 with the first digit representing the

Occupation_405: Division (Major GroupL second digit representing Sub-Division (Sub-Major GroupL third digit representing the Group (Minor Group) and the fourth digit representing the Family (Unit

Occupation_406: GroupL a decimal is introduced after the first four digits in order to create a distinction between the Families and individual Occupations. The NC0-2015 is in two Volumes viz. Vol I & II (A& B) where Vol I gives the abstract of Occupations along with their concordance to the earlier NC0-2004. Vol II gives the detailed descriptions ofthe occupations. I i 5. The Ministry is implementing the National Career Service (NCS) Project as a Mission Mode Project for modernising and transforming the network of employment exchanges and

Occupation_407: Model Career Centres are being set up in collaboration with States. The NCS Portal is operational at www.ncs.gov.in and aims to link job seekers with employment opportunities along with rich career content. The NCO Codes are integrally enmeshed in the NCS initiative and facilitates efficient job matching. The NCO Codes may be used by varied stakeholders in making information in the employment market more transparent and objective. Soft copies of the publication is available on the NCS portal. 6. The NC0-2015 series has been evolved along with career content to contribute to the knowledge repository of career options. More details on the classification, as well as the principles, scope and structure of the classification are available on the National Career

Occupation_408: Service (www.ncs.gov.in) platform. This knowledge repository provides career related information for use by career counsellors and job aspirants across the country and aims at supporting policy makers, students, job seekers, persons returning to the labour force, investors and employers in making better labour market decisions. 7. I am confident that the publication will prove useful in classifying occupations for official work, survey and research work, international comparisons on the demand and supply of workforce and many more such areas. I place on record my appreciation for all the stakeholders who have contributed their valuable inputs in the publication. I also take this opportunity to extend my thanks to the members of the Expert Group on the career content who have examined and vetted the contents of this publication/documents. I also extend my thanks to the officers of the Directorate lead by Mr. Pravin Srivastava, Deputy Director

Occupation_409: General (Employment) for timely coordination with all the stakeholders involved in this initiative. --~~Lj- (P.P. Mitra)

Occupation_410: Principal Labour & Employment Advisor and Director General Employment II ii J3.J1=J ~ x~ \J1 ~ II "l +-t ?II C'1 q wFcffi J3.{1=J ~ ~ 3i!lc0<'1, ~o~o~o ~ ~-110001 ~urm\ '+fRtl 'fl i( ¢I i( ~ "ff#rq Tele : 91-11-23 71 02 65 MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT

Occupation_411: Fax : 91-11-23 35 56 79 SHANKAR AGGARWAL, I.A.S. SHRAM SHAKTI BHAVAN E-mail :secy-labour@nic.in

Occupation_412: Secretary to Govt. of India NEW DELHI-110001 D.O. No. D,GE-11/01/2016-VG/01

Occupation_413: Dated: 1 7 J 5 f :L_o I f, Subject: Release of the National Classification of Occupation (NCO), 2015 series.

Occupation_414: The Directorate General of Employment (DGE) is responsible for revising and maintaining the National Classification of Occupations (NCO) on the lines of International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) of the ILO. The codes are used for classification of occupations by the employment exchanges and census/survey organisations of the

Occupation_415: Central and State government. These codes are revised from time to time to capture the changes in occupational patterns and structural changes in the economy. The codes also help in promoting International comparability of statistical data relating to occupations. The first set of occupation standards (ISCO) was brought out by the International Labour

Occupation_416: Organisation (ILO) in 1958 and revised from time to time, the latest being the 2008 series. The corresponding series in the Indian National Classification of Occupation (NCO) were 1958, 1967 and 2004. These occupational standards follow a scientific and hierarchical approach having major, minor and unit groups of classification which has evolved over the years to capture the structural changes in the employment market. The NCO codes are extensively used by the employment exchanges and other data/survey collection agencies like the Ministry of Statistics & PI (NSSO, CSO), Census Commissioner & RGI, NITI Aayog, IAMR, State Governments, Academic Institutions etc. 2. The current national series (NC0-2004) was based on the ISC0-1988 series and required updation to capture information on the new occupations that have emerged, especially on account of liberalisation and globalisation. In the meanwhile, the Ministry began implementing the National Career Service as a Mission Mode Project for modernising and transforming the network of employment exchanges and 100 Model Career Centres are being set up in collaboration with States. The NCS Portal is operational at www.ncs.gov.in and aims to link job seekers with employment opportunities along with rich career content. III iii The NCO Codes are integrally enmeshed in the NCS initiative and facilitates efficient job matching. The NCO - 2015 code is in 2 volumes, the first giving the abstract occupations along with their concordance to the earlier NC0-2004 series and the second volume giving the detailed occupational description. A hard copy of the first volume is enclosed for ready reference. It is requested that the NCO Codes may be used by all stakeholders in making information in the employment market more transparent and objective. Soft copies of these publications are available on the attached CD and also on the NCS portal. 3. I request that information about the publication be circulated to the various

Occupation_417: Departments and other users and its usage may be ensured by sending various statistical returns using these revised codes. We look forward to suggestions for improvement in the NCO codes and these may kindly be sent at feedback.dget@nic.in.

Occupation_418: All Secretary, GOI Ministries and Departments (As per list attached) IV iv ~ ~) \J14 11 '( n;i=?lrr.lC "':TTT<Q ~~~ -;:ffl ~-11 0001 ~ 3BtCll<1, 3l"nfo~o~o

Occupation_419: Tele : 91-11-23 71 02 65 ~ '<"l'<ctll'< cf; ~ MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT Fax : 91-11-23 35 56 79 SHANKAR AGGARWAL, I.A.S. SHRAM SHAKTI BHAVAN E-mail :secy-labour@nic.in

Occupation_420: Secretary to Govt. of India NEW DELHI-110001 D.O. No. DGE-11/01/2016-VG/01

Occupation_421: Dated: t l / .>/ ;;ur.r-£ Subject: Release of the National Classification of Occupation (NCO), 2015 series.

Occupation_422: All Secretary, GOI Ministries and Departments {As per list attached) VI vi

Occupation_423: Table of Contents VOL- II B 1. Division 6 1 - 40 2. Division 7 41 - 309 3. Division 8 310 - 530 4. Division 9 531 - 567 INDEX National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 Occupations in this Division are classified into the following Sub Divisions:

Occupation_424: Division 61 Market Oriented Skilled 6 Agricultural Workers 62 Market Oriented Skilled Forestry, Fishery and Hunting Workers

Occupation_425: Skilled Agricultural, Forestry and 63 Subsistence Farmers, Fishers, Fishery Workers Hunters and Gatherers

Occupation_426: Skilled agricultural, forestry and fishery Sub Division 61 workers grow and harvest field or tree

Occupation_427: Market Oriented Skilled and shrub crops, gather wild fruits and Agricultural Workers plants, breed, tend or hunt animals, produce a variety of animal husbandry

Occupation_428: Market-oriented skilled agricultural products, cultivate, conserve and exploit workers plan, organize and perform forests, breed or catch fish and cultivate farming operations to grow and harvest or gather other forms of aquatic life in field or tree and shrub crops and produce order to provide food, shelter and income a variety of animals and animal products for themselves and their households. for sale or delivery on a regular basis to Tasks performed by skilled agricultural, wholesale buyers, and marketing forestry and fishery workers usually organizations or at markets include: preparing the soil; sowing, Tasks performed by workers in this sub- planting, spraying, fertilising and major group usually include: preparing the harvesting field crops; growing fruit and soil; sowing, planting, spraying, fertilising other tree and shrub crops; growing and harvesting field crops, growing fruit garden vegetables and horticultural and other tree and shrub crops; growing products; gathering wild fruits and plants; garden vegetables and horticultural breeding, raising, tending or hunting products; raising, breeding and tending animals mainly to obtain meat, milk, hair, animals mainly to obtain meat, milk, hair, fur, skin, sericulture, apiarian or other fur, skin, sericulture, apiarian or other products; cultivating, conserving and products; storing and carrying out some exploiting forests; breeding or catching processing of t produce; selling their fish; cultivating or gathering other forms products to purchasers, marketing of aquatic life; storing and carrying out organizations or at markets. Supervision some basic processing of their produce; of other workers may be included. selling their products to purchasers, marketing organizations or at markets. Supervision of other workers may be Occupations in this Sub Division are included. classified into the following Groups: 611 Market Gardeners and Crop

Occupation_429: Growers 612 Animal Producers 613 Mixed Crop and Animal Workers VOLUME II B 1 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6

Occupation_430: Growers Cultivators, General; Farmer, General; grows crops, vegetables, fruits, etc. depending upon soil, irrigation facilities,

Occupation_431: Market gardeners and crop growers plan, market, etc., and sells produce. organize and perform operations to grow

Occupation_432: Determines crops to be grown depending and harvest field crops, to grow fruit and on nature of soil, climate, irrigation and other tree and shrub crops, to grow marketing facilities. Selects and purchases garden vegetables and medicinal and good seed, fertiliser, implements and other plants, and to produce horticultural other items of farm equipment including and horticultural nurseries products, for machinery. Clears field of stones, grass, sale or delivery on a regular basis to shrubs, trees etc., using hand tools. wholesale buyers, marketing

Occupation_433: Prepares plots by raising ‘bund’ organizations or at markets. (earthwork) around them for retention of water. Tills land using plough or tractor Occupations in this Group are classified and breads loads. Sows seeds and levels into the following Families: earth. Makes channels connecting land to source of water for irrigation. Conducts 6111 Field Crop and Vegetable Growers weeding and hoeing to conserve moisture. 6112 Tree and Shrub Crop Growers

Occupation_434: Prepares manure by collecting and storing 6113 Gardeners, Horticultural and farmyard refuse into ditch and covering it

Occupation_435: Nursery Growers with earth. Sprays insecticides, evolves 6114 Mixed Crop Growers measures to protect crops from destruction by plant diseases and wild 6115 Medicinal and Aromatic Plant animals and nurses growing crops by

Occupation_436: Cultivators picking wild growth. Harvests matured 6116 Agriculture Information crops using sickle etc. Collects harvested

Occupation_437: Management crop into bundles and carries it to the threshing ground when completely dried

Occupation_438: Field Crop and Vegetable Growers treading bullocks or machine. Separates grain from straw by winnowing. Bags corn, bundles straw and stores corn in godown.

Occupation_439: Sells produce in market. Hires labourers organize and perform farming operations when necessary and supervises their to grow and harvest various types of field work. Maintains equipment, building, crop such as wheat and other cereals, rice, fences etc. in good order. May operate beetroot, sugar-cane, ground-nuts, tractor, winnowing, threshing and other tobacco, reed or other field crops and machines. May breed animals. May do potatoes, cabbages or other field share cropping or take land on lease for vegetables, for sale or delivery on a cultivation. regular basis to wholesale buyers, marketing organizations or at markets. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_440: Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers VOLUME II B 2 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 6111.0101 bushes to prevent destruction of crops by

Occupation_441: Paddy Farmer animals and trespassing. Sprays insecticides and evolves measures to protect crop from plant diseases, insects

Occupation_442: Paddy Farmer cultivates paddy as per the and pests. Nurses growing crops by package of practices recommended for a careful watch and harvests matured crops particular agronomic climate zone, type of using sickle or other harvesting soil, rainfall pattern and climatic implements or machines. Collects and conditions to achieve the yields as per the preserves seeds. Collects harvested crop genetic potential of a given variety and into bundles and removes to threshing sell the produce in the market. floors. Dries harvested crop in sun.

Occupation_443: Qualification Pack Details: grain from chaff. Bags and transports yield QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0101 by carts for storage and sale in market. QP NOS Name Paddy Farmer

Occupation_444: Hires labourers if required and supervises NSQF Level 4 their work. Prepares manure by collecting and storing cow dung into ditch. Keeps ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: equipment, building, fences etc. in good

Occupation_445: Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers threshing and other machines, May breed animals. 6111.0200

Occupation_446: Cultivator, Crop; Farmer, Crop grows field Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers crops of wheat, paddy, cotton, sugar cane etc., according to type of land and 6111.0201 irrigation facilities available. Determines

Occupation_447: Wheat Cultivator type of crop to be grown according to nature of soil, climatic conditions,

Occupation_448: Wheat Cultivator cultivates wheat as per irrigation and marketing facilities in that the package of practices recommended area. Selects and purchases seeds, for a particular agro climate zone, type of fertilises and other items of farm soil, rainfall pattern and climatic condition equipment including machinery. Clears to achieve the yield as per the genetic land of grass, stones etc. using spades and potential of given variety and sell the other tools. Divides farm into easy produce as per the competitive market portions (fields) and raises boundary prices without distress sale. round them for retention of water.

Occupation_449: Qualification Pack Details: tractor or other implements to soften QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0102 earth and increase fertility. Connects land QP NOS Name Wheat Cultivator with source of water by digging channels NSQF Level 4 for irrigation as required. Sows by broadcasting seeds in field and levelling ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: up with wooden plough. Conducts weeding and hoeing to conserve moisture. Code 6111

Occupation_450: Fences farm using barbed wire or thorny Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers VOLUME II B 3 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 6111.0301 6111.0501

Occupation_451: Maize Cultivator undertakes the Soya bean Cultivator undertakes the cultivation of maize crop at the farm level. cultivation of oilseeds at the farm level.

Occupation_452: The individual is also responsible for The individual is also responsible for harvesting the maize crop. The maize harvesting the soya bean. The Soya bean cultivator needs to adapt recommended Cultivator needs to adapt recommended practices for a particular agro climate practices for a particular agronomic zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern and climate zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern climatic conditions to achieve the best and climatic conditions to achieve the possible yield best possible yield

Occupation_453: Qualification Pack Details: Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0103 QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0201 QP NOS Name Maize Cultivator QP NOS Name Soya bean NSQF Level 4 Cultivator NSQF Level 4 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_454: Pulses Cultivator undertakes the cultivation of pulses at the farm level. The Cotton Cultivator undertakes the individual is also responsible for cultivation of cotton crop at the farm harvesting the pulses. The pulses level. The individual is also responsible for cultivator needs to adapt recommended harvesting the cotton crop. The Cotton practices for a particular agro climate Cultivator needs to adapt recommended zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern and practices for a particular agro climate climatic conditions to achieve the best zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern and possible yield climatic conditions to achieve the best possible yield.

Occupation_455: Qualification Pack Details: Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0104 QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0202 QP NOS Name Pulses Cultivator QP NOS Name Cotton Cultivator NSQF Level 4 NSQF Level 4 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_456: Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers VOLUME II B 4 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 6111.0701 and evolves measures to protect fruits

Occupation_457: Sugarcane Cultivator from wild animals, etc. Checks maturity of fruits and plucks ripe fruits by hand at appropriate time. Develops different

Occupation_458: Sugarcane Cultivator undertakes the varieties of trees by grafting, budding, etc. cultivation of sugarcane crop at the farm

Occupation_459: Transports plants and fruits by carts or level. The individual is also responsible for automobile and sells them. Hires harvesting the sugarcane crop. The labourers when needed and supervises

Occupation_460: Sugarcane Cultivator needs to adapt their work. Keeps fences, building and recommended practices for a particular agricultural tools and implements in good agro climatic zone, type of soil, rainfall condition. May prepare seedbeds and pattern and climatic conditions to achieve raise seedlings for own use and for sale. the best possible yield.

Occupation_461: May specialize in cultivating any particular type of fruit. May arrange preservation of

Occupation_462: Qualification Pack Details: fruits in cold storage. May specialize in QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0203 grafting or budding. QP NOS Name Sugarcane

Occupation_463: Cultivator ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: NSQF Level 4

Occupation_464: Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_465: Cultivator, Fruit the package of practices recommended for a particular agronomic climate zone,

Occupation_466: Cultivator, Fruit: Farmer, Fruit grows type of soil, rainfall pattern and climatic varieties of nuts and fruits depending on conditions to achieve the coconut yields type of soil, climate, irrigational and as per the genetic potential of a given transport facilities. Determines type of variety and sell the products as per the nuts or fruits to be grown based on nature competitive market prices without of soil, climatic conditions and irrigational distress sale. facilities. Selects and purchases seeds, seedlings, cutting, etc. fertilizer and

Occupation_467: Qualification Pack Details: agricultural equipment required for QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0503 cultivation. Prepares land for planting by QP NOS Name Coconut Grower ploughing, manuring, levelling, etc. Plants NSQF Level 4 seedlings and cuttings or sow seeds and irrigates fields. Arranges regular supply of ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: water by digging channels to source of water. Prepares manure for use in Code 6112 cultivation by storing farm yard refuse to Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers get converted into usable manure. Weeds and hoes grass and prunes branches of 6111.0852 fruit plants by hand tools to facilitate Friends of Coconut Tree better growth and yield. Sprays insecticide VOLUME II B 5 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6

Occupation_468: Friends of Coconut Tree has to climb 6111.1001 coconut palms with the help of a climbing Mango Grower machine. He has to identify tender/mature nuts, harvest it and handle

Occupation_469: Mango Grower cultivates mangoes as per them with care and also clean the crown the recommended practices for a given of the coconut palms. He should be able agro economic zone and achieve the to identify the types of pests and diseases expected yield. He is also responsible for of coconut and apprise and help farmers hygienic harvest and post-harvest of the to adopt Integrated pests and disease mango crop and ensuring sale of the management practices. He will look into same. various aspects of coconut crop

Occupation_470: Qualification Pack Details: management and should be able to QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0402 apprise farmers regarding needed QP NOS Name Mango Grower improvement. NSQF Level 4

Occupation_471: Qualification Pack Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0504

Occupation_472: Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers as per the package of practices recommended for a particular agronomic 6111.0901 climate zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern

Occupation_473: Banana Farmer and climatic condition to achieve the yield as per the genetic potential of given

Occupation_474: Banana Farmer cultivates banana as per variety and sell the produce as per the the package of practices recommended competitive market prices without for a particular agronomic climate zone, distress sale. type of soil, rainfall pattern and climatic condition to achieve the yield as per the

Occupation_475: Qualification Pack Details: genetic potential of given variety and sell QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0403 the produce as per the competitive QP NOS Name Citrus Fruit Grower market prices without distress sale. NSQF Level 4

Occupation_476: Qualification Pack Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0201

Occupation_477: Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers NSQF Level 4 6111.1200 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_478: Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers VOLUME II B 6 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6

Occupation_479: Viniculturist; Grape Cultivator cultivates conserve moisture. Harvests matured grapes for commercial use. Determines vegetables by cutting with knife or pulling varieties of grapes to be grown, according or digging out from ground using hand to soil, weather and market conditions. tools. Transports vegetables to market

Occupation_480: Selects and purchases vine stock, fertilizer place for sale. Hires labourers on and farm machinery. Hires workers to cultivation if required and supervises their prepare soil, layout new plantings and work. Keeps buildings, fences and other train young stock. Operates farm agricultural equipment in good repairs. machinery and directs workers to apply Collects farmyard refuse to convert it into fertilizer and pesticides to crop. Decides manure. May operate tractor for when and how to bud, graft, prune, preparing fields. May arrange to keep cultivate, and harvest crop. Arranges with vegetables in cold storage. May specialize buyers for sale of crop. in growing any particular kind of vegetable like peas, potatoes, etc. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_481: Vegetables grows variety of vegetables Bulb Crop Cultivates bulb crops as per the according to soil, season and demand. package of practices recommended for a

Occupation_482: Determines vegetables to be grown taking particular agronomic climate zone, type of into consideration nature of soil, irrigation soil, rainfall pattern and climatic condition facilities, climatic conditions, consumption to achieve the yield as per the genetic and market values. Selects and purchases potential of given variety and sell the seed, fertilisers and other items of farm produce as per the competitive market equipment including machines. Ploughs prices without distress sale. land adopting indigenous methods or breaks land by tractor. Divides land into Qualification Pack Details: small plots by raising small bunds QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0501 (earthwork) around for retention of water QP NOS Name Bulb Crop Cultivator and manure. Clears land by removing NSQF Level 4 grass, stones, etc. by hand. Mixes manure with soil, sows seeds by spreading over ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ground and levelling or plant cutting and

Occupation_483: Code 6111 irrigates field as required, by digging out

Occupation_484: Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers drains and connecting them to source of water. Fences farm if required with 6111.1501 barbed wire or thorny bushes for

Occupation_485: Solanaceous Crop Cultivator protection. Spray insecticides and takes other protective measures against plant

Occupation_486: Solanaceous Crop Cultivator Cultivates diseases and destruction by wild animals, solanaceous crop as per the package of pests etc. Hoes and weeds fields to practices recommended for a particular VOLUME II B 7 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 agronomic climate zone, type of soil, type of soil, rainfall pattern and climatic rainfall pattern and climatic condition to condition to achieve the yield as per the achieve the yield as per the genetic genetic potential of given variety and sell potential of given variety and sell the the produce as per the competitive produce as per the competitive market market prices without distress sale. prices without distress sale.

Occupation_487: Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0901 QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0502 QP NOS Name Chillies Cultivator QP NOS Name Solanaceous Crop NSQF Level 4

Occupation_488: Cultivator NSQF Level 4 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_489: Code 6111 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers

Occupation_490: Tuber Crop Cultivator Coriander Cultivator cultivates coriander as per the package of practices

Occupation_491: Tuber Crop Cultivator cultivates tuber recommended for a particular agronomic crop as per the package of practices climate zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern recommended for a particular agronomic and climatic condition to achieve the yield climate zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern as per the genetic potential of given and climatic condition to achieve the yield variety and sell the produce as per the as per the genetic potential of given competitive market prices without variety and sell the produce as per the distress sale. competitive market prices without distress sale.

Occupation_492: Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0902 QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0503 QP NOS Name Coriander Cultivator QP NOS Name Tuber Crop NSQF Level 4

Occupation_493: Chillies Cultivator Field Man, Agriculture; Mate Agriculture distributes and controls labour of

Occupation_494: Chillies Cultivator cultivates chillies as per Agricultural or Horticulture farm and the package of practices recommended supervises ploughing, sowing, harvesting, for a particular agronomic climate zone, etc. under directions of superiors. Checks VOLUME II B 8 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 attendance of labour. Allots work to each bushes, grape vines, berry-bearing worker. Collects seeds, fertilisers and bushes, cocoa trees and rubber trees and equipment from stores and distributes to collect sap, for sale or delivery on a them to workers. Controls workers regular basis to wholesale buyers, engaged in ploughing, manuring, sowing, marketing organizations or at markets. irrigating, gap filling, harvesting, weeding, threshing, winnowing etc. Collects from 6112.0100 workers at close of day all implements Pruner, Tea Gardens distributed to them in morning and deposits them in stores. Reports progress

Occupation_495: Pruner, Tea Gardens prunes branches of of work to superior and arranges payment tea plants to produce better yield. of wages by superior. Attends to any

Occupation_496: Observes plant and decides extent of other job assigned by superior. pruning needed. Cuts branches using pruning knife at desired point and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: disposes them off by spreading at bottom

Occupation_497: Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers for planting tea plants. May spray insecticides. May perform low skilled 6111.9900 manufacturing tasks in factory during

Occupation_498: Field Crop and Vegetable Growers, heavy harvest months.

Occupation_499: Field Crop and Vegetable Growers, other Code 6112 include those who plan and carry out the Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers necessary operations to grow and harvest various types of field crops such as wheat 6112.0200 and other cereals, rice, beetroot, sugar- Tapper, Palm Juice cane, ground-nuts, tobacco, reeds or other field crops and potatoes, cabbages Tapper, Palm Juice makes cuts in trunks of or other field vegetables, for sale or palm-trees and gathers oozed out sap delivery on a regular basis to wholesale (palm juice). Climbs palm-tree with pot buyers, marketing organizations or at and knife tied with his waist through belt. markets not elsewhere classified. Cleans space at top of tree-trunk preparatory to tapping. Cuts narrow ‘V’ ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: shaped opening in tree-trunk at specified

Occupation_500: Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers Fastens pot on tree trunk with rope and ensures that palm-juice drops into pot.

Occupation_501: Family 6112 Adjusts pot, if necessary, to avoid waste.

Occupation_502: Empties full pot into bucket next day and re-fixes empty pot at adjacent place on

Occupation_503: Tree and Shrub Crop Growers tree trunk for further collection. Repeats process for collection of juice from other

Occupation_504: Tree and shrub crop growers plan trees. organize and perform farming operations to grow and harvest trees and shrubs, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: such as fruit and nut trees, tea and coffee VOLUME II B 9 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6

Occupation_505: Code 6112 latex. Fastens spout and cup below lowest

Occupation_506: Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers end of cut to collect oozed out latex. Adds preservatives or anticoagulants into cup 6112.0201 where specified. Repeats process on other

Occupation_507: Neera Technician trees under his charge and empties cups when full or when oozing stops, into

Occupation_508: Neera Technician has to manually climb bucket. Scraps coagulated latex from scars coconut palms. He has to identify the on trees before making fresh cutting. inflorescence and prepare it for tapping

Occupation_509: Ensures that cups and spouts are clean by beating it with right force and rhythm. and tapping cuts are of uniform length

Occupation_510: He performs this twice in a day for two and depth, without causing injury to tree- weeks. He has to cut the tip of the trunk. Repeats process on tapped trees inflorescence, wrap it up, apply clay and next morning. May sharpen tapping knife place a can for Neera to flow into it. He and carry latex to reception station for has to perform this activity twice a day. weighment and further processing.

Occupation_511: He has to store this Neera under suitable temperature and hygienic environment, in ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: order to prevent any microbial contamination. He should be able to Code 6112 handle freshly harvested Neera, have Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers knowledge about transportation for Neera to processing centres and primary 6112.0400 processing of Neers and Neera based Budder products. They also clean the crown of the coconut palms. He should be able to Budder buds field-grown rose plants with identify the types of pests and disease hybrid buds during rose-growing season: management practices. He will look into Crouches over rows of rose plants to various aspects of coconut crop reach plant rootstock. Cuts T-shaped management and should be able to incision on rootstock and opens incision, apprise farmers regarding needed using budding knife. Slices hybrid bud improvement. from scion wood and inserts bud into incision. Observes tying of buds to ensure

Occupation_512: Qualification Pack Details: quality of tie. Repeats procedure, rapidly, QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0505 throughout work period to maintain QP NOS Name Neera Technician production. NSQF Level 4 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 6112

Occupation_513: Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers 6112.0501 6112.0300 Tea Plantation Worker

Occupation_514: Tapper, Rubber Tea Plantation Worker is responsible for

Occupation_515: Tapper, Rubber cuts channel grooves on carrying out the ground level activities in a trunk of rubber trees at prescribed angle tea plantation right from nursery on specified area and gathers excluded preparation to harvesting and storage. VOLUME II B 10 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6

Occupation_516: Qualification Pack Details: Code 6112 QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0204 Title Tree and Shrub Crop Grower QP NOS Name Tea Plantation Worker 6112.0801 NSQF Level 2 Rubber Nursery Worker-Budder ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Rubber Nursery Worker-Budder carries

Occupation_517: Code 6112 out all the labour oriented nursery Title Tree and Shrub Crop Grower activities specialized in bud grafting work.

Occupation_518: He is responsible for the timely 6112.0601 completion of bud grafting and all Coffee Plantation Worker seasonal activities assigned to him facilitating smooth running of the nursery and production of quality planting Coffee Plantation Worker is responsible materials as envisaged by the organization for carrying out the ground level activities in a coffee plantation right from nursery

Occupation_519: Qualification Pack Details: preparation to harvesting and storage. QP NOS Reference RSC/Q0935

Occupation_520: Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Name Rubber Nursery Worker-Budder QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0203 NSQF Level 4 QP NOS Name Coffee Plantation Worker ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: NSQF Level 2

Occupation_521: Code 6112 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Tree and Shrub Crop Grower

Occupation_522: Title Tree and Shrub Crop Grower Rubber Nursery Worker-General 6112.0701 Bamboo Grower Rubber Nursery Worker carries out all the labour oriented nursery activities. He is responsible for the timely completion of

Occupation_523: Bamboo Grower is responsible for all seasonal activities facilitating smooth cultivating bamboo as per the running of the nursery and production of recommended practices for a given agro quality planting materials as envisaged by economic zone and achieve the expected the organization. yield. He is also responsible for hygienic harvest and post-harvest of the bamboo

Occupation_524: Qualification Pack Details: and ensuring sale of the same. QP NOS Reference RSC/Q0936

Occupation_525: Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Name Rubber Nursery Worker-General QP NOS Reference AGR/Q1101 NSQF Level 4 QP NOS Name Bamboo Grower NSQF Level 4 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 6112

Occupation_526: Title Tree and Shrub Crop Grower VOLUME II B 11 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 6112.9900 crop and supervises plucking, tapping and

Occupation_527: Tree and Shrub Crop Growers, threshing of leaves, etc. Ensures proper maintenance and development of

Occupation_528: Other plantation estate. Supervises recruitment and welfare of labour employed.

Occupation_529: Maintains records relating to cost of include those who plan and carry out the production, sale and other accounts. May necessary operations to grow and harvest conduct research and organize trees and shrubs not elsewhere classified. demonstration. May arrange preservation of produce and partially process them ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: prior to marketing. Is designated as

Occupation_530: Cinchona; Planter, Cocoa; Planter, Rubber according to type of crop grown.

Occupation_531: Gardeners, horticultural and nursery growers plan organize and perform 6113.0200 operations to cultivate and maintain Nurseryman trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants in parks and private gardens, and to produce Nurseryman; Mali, Nursery manages saplings, bulbs and seeds, or grow nursery on own account, or on behalf of vegetables and flowers by intensive employer to grow trees, plants, flowers, cultivation techniques, for sale or delivery shrubs, creepers, seeds, bulbs etc. in open on a regular basis to wholesale buyers, air or green houses for sale to customers. marketing organizations or at markets. Decides kind and number of plants to be grown and method of planting, cultivating 6113.0100 and treatment based on soil, climatic

Occupation_532: Planter conditions, irrigation facilities etc. Selects and purchases seeds, fertilizers,

Occupation_533: Planter manages plantation on own insecticide. Equipment and machinery and account to grow plantation crops such as other items. Plans preparation of beds tea, coffee, rubber, etc. Arranges to and method of planting, depending on procure seed according to type of crop type of plants to be grown. Prepares bed such as tea, coffee, rubber, etc. by various processes such as breaking soil,

Occupation_534: Determines kinds of crop to be grown. mixing fertilizers, etc. sows seeds, plants,

Occupation_535: Gets land cleared and prepared for seedlings, cuttings or propagates plants by growing crops by digging, ploughing, grafting, budding and other methods and harrowing etc. Organizes and supervises makes water channels. Watches growth of various farm operations, sowing, sapling, seedlings, grafts and plants. Hoes manuring, weeding, spraying insecticide, and prunes excess growth and off-shoots and protection of crop from destruction of plants, dusts and sprays pesticides and by wild animals. Arranges harvesting of takes other measures to protect plants VOLUME II B 12 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 from pets, wild animals, etc. Observes Qualification Pack Details: development of plants. Develops methods QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0202 of grafting and budding./ Collects and QP NOS Name Gardener preserves seeds for sale. Hires labour if NSQF Level 4 necessary and undertakes planting, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: weeding, pruning etc. as required.

Occupation_536: Nursery Growers good condition. Keeps records of cost and production statement. Sells seedling, 6113.0400 seeds, bulbs etc. May specialize in

Occupation_537: Grounds man; Grounds Keeper prepares ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and keeps up recreation and sports

Occupation_538: Title Gardeners, Horticultural and games. Grades and selects site. Supervises

Occupation_539: Nursery Growers breaking of soil, removal of weeds and foreign matters and retains required type 6113.0301 of grass if necessary. Plans drainage,

Occupation_540: Gardener, General checks final preparation of soil bed, mixes fertilizers with chemicals like sulphate of

Occupation_541: Gardener, General; Mali General grows iron to improve growth and colour of turf flowers, trees, shrubs, seedlings, and sows required type of grass seeds. vegetables, etc. in public or private Lays turf for preparing different types of gardens. Prepares soil and sows seeds, grounds and sports fields such as hockey, plants, seedlings etc. Waters seed-beds tennis, cricket, football, golf, etc. Gives and growing plants. Weeds and hoes necessary treatment to fields according to garden and prunes hedges and bushes. type of ground and pitch required such as

Occupation_542: Sprays and dusts pesticides and evolves turf wicket, matting wicket, golf course other measures to protect plants from etc. Dresses turf with nitro-chalk, diseases and wild animals. Prepares soil ammonium sulphate and other chemicals and lays lawn. Waters mows and levels at regular intervals to prevent invasion of lawns. Prepares paths and ensures their earth worms and diseases and adopts proper up-keep. Collects and preserves measures against ruinous actions of seeds for sowing. Supervises labourers rabbits, field mice etc. Top dresses turf by engaged for assistance. Keeps implements moving grass cutting and rolling. etc. in good working order. May maintain Investigates causes of bad lawns and takes green house for display. May cultivate appropriate steps to renovate neglected vegetables and fruit trees. May specialize lawns, fields and grounds. Measures and in ornamental gardening. May work in marks playing grounds, tracks etc., with nursery for improving variety of plants chalk line, sets up goal posts and performs from seeds, cuttings, grafting or budding related tasks. Supervises work of men and be designated as MALI, NURSERY. engaged in upkeep of fields May prepare

Occupation_543: May sell plants, buy seeds, fertilizers, annual calendar to facilitate progress. insecticides, etc. May pay wages to May trim hedges and maintain flowerbeds labourers employed. and pathways. VOLUME II B 13 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Floriculturist- (Protected

Occupation_544: Nursery Growers Floriculturist- (Protected Cultivation) performs the duties of a flower crop 6113.0501 cultivator in the green houses.

Occupation_545: Green House Fitter is responsible for the QP NOS Reference AGR/Q 0206 installation of greenhouse structure as per QP NOS Name Floriculturist- the structural layout and bill material (Protected prepared by the supplier which will meet Cultivation) up the exact requirement for the crops to NSQF Level 4 be frown under. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_546: Qualification Pack Details: Code 6113 QP NOS Reference AGR/Q 0302 Title Gardeners, Horticultural and QP NOS Name Green House Fitter Nursery Growers NSQF Level 4 6113.9900 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Nursery Workers and Gardeners,

Occupation_547: Title Gardeners, Horticultural and Nursery Growers Nursery Workers and Gardeners, other include all other nursery workers and 6113.0601 gardeners engaged in growing flowers,

Occupation_548: Floriculturist- (Open Cultivation) seeds, bulbs, vegetables etc., not elsewhere classified.

Occupation_549: Floriculturist- (Open Cultivation) performs the duties of a flower crop cultivator in ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: the open field Code 6113

Occupation_550: Qualification Pack Details: Nursery Growers QP NOS Reference AGR/Q 0205 QP NOS Name Floriculturist- (Open Family 6114

Occupation_551: Mixed crop growers plan organize and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: perform farming operations to grow and

Occupation_552: Title Gardeners, Horticultural and crops, field vegetables, tree and shrub

Occupation_553: Nursery Growers crops, and garden, horticultural and nursery products, for sale or delivery to 6113.0602 wholesale buyers, marketing organizations or at markets. VOLUME II B 14 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 6114.9900 profitability. The person is responsible for Mixed Crop Growers, Other working with Research and Development team in agriculture industries (including seed, fertilizer, pesticides, and micro

Occupation_554: Mixed Crop Growers, other include those irrigation industries) to satisfy the farmer who plan and carry out the necessary needs. They understand and market the operations to grow vegetables and technology to be transferred to farmers harvest specific combinations of field by way of demonstrations and training. crops, field vegetables, trees, shrub crops

Occupation_555: They also co-ordinate and motivate the and garden, horticultural and nursery farmers to adapt to modern methods for products not elsewhere classified. good returns. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_556: Medicinal and Aromatic Plant ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_557: Medicinal and aromatic plant growers plan, organize and perform operations to 6116.0102 cultivate plants that are used in traditional

Occupation_558: Agriculture Extension Service medical practices such as Unani, Ayurveda

Occupation_559: Family 6116 responsible for speedy transfer of information and technology to farmers.

Occupation_560: Management generation of technology and its transfer to the farmers for increasing production, The agriculture information workers productivity and income from agriculture enhance the farmers’ knowledge about and allied sectors on a sustained basis. An crop techniques and help them to agriculture extension service provider increase production by sharing the latest gives talks, guidance and actual technical knowhow with the farmers. demonstrations on latest technologies 6116.0101 related to agriculture. He also works with

Occupation_561: Agriculture Extension Executive other experts in agriculture to learn more or even develop new methods that could advance production. Agriculture Extension Executive works with R&D team to market and transfer the technology, products, knowledge and Qualification Pack Details: information to the farmers, acting as a QP NOS Reference AGR/Q7601 bridge between the company and farmers increasing their productivity and VOLUME II B 15 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 QP NOS Name Agriculture Occupations in this Group are classified

Occupation_562: Provider NSQF Level 4 6121 Livestock and Dairy Producers 6122 Poultry Producers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 6123 Apiarists and Sericulturists

Occupation_563: Community Service Provider (CSP)/VLE is an individual selected from within a Livestock and dairy producers plan, village/area to act as a touch point organize and perform farming operations between the business and the customer to breed and raise domesticated animals to run the CSC. A VLE educates villagers on (excluding poultry), such as cattle, sheep, 26 Types OF G2C services and scores of pigs, goats, horses and camels, for the other services related to daily lives of rural production of meat, milk and other dairy population. The VLE then sells products products, skins, and wool or for use as and services offered by the corporate and working, sporting or recreational animals the Government through CSC. for sale or delivery to wholesale buyers, marketing organizations or at markets.

Occupation_564: Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Reference AGR/Q7603 6121.0100 QP NOS Name Community Service Farmer, Livestock

Occupation_565: Farmer, Livestock manages farm on own account for raising and breeding different ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: kinds of livestock. Selects and purchases

Occupation_566: Title Mixed Crop Growers shelter animals from weather and gets enclosures put up for their safety.

Occupation_567: Animal Producers to feed animals and stock fodder and other feeding material through purchases.

Occupation_568: Animal producers plan, organize and pastures and ensures by constant watch perform farming operations to breed and that animals do not go astray or get lost. raise domesticated animals, poultry,

Occupation_569: Restrains them from drinking polluted insects and non-domesticated animals for water. Examines and treats animals for the production of meat, dairy products, minor injuries and infection. Arranges honey, skins, textiles and other products proper medical aid in serious cases. Trains or for use as working, sporting or to cultivate desirable habits in animals. recreational animals, for sale or delivery

Occupation_570: Selects and pairs pedigree animals for to wholesale buyers, marketing breeding. Gets animals bred by artificial organizations or at markets. VOLUME II B 16 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 insemination if necessary. Tends animals and protects and guards the young during birth and protects and guards animals. Arranges proper and regular young animals. Performs tasks connected cleaning of animals, sheds and with milking. Markets milk, and animals surroundings. Treats animals for minor for meat, breeding etc. Gets animals diseases and injuries and arranges proper inoculated and vaccinated in time and medical aid in serious cases. Arranges adopts preventive measures in case of cleaning and massaging of udder, milking outbreak of epidemic. Keeps records of of animals in hygienic manner by hand or feed consumed, milk and other items machine, preserving milk, transporting produced and stock sold or purchased. milk to various dairies and customer or

Occupation_571: Attends to all correspondence, accounts selecting and selling animals etc. as and administration of farm. Ensures required. Records feed consumed and proper cleaning of sheds and stable, milk and other products sold. Adopts flaying of skins and hides of fallen animals, appropriate measures to quarantine disposal of carcasses etc. as necessary. animals in case of epidemic. May get milk

Occupation_572: May raise particular breeds of animal. pasteurised before sale. May grow and

Occupation_573: May raise and exhibit show animals. May cultivate feed for animals. May raise and grow and cultivate feed for animals. exhibit show animals. May brand animals with identifying marks. May separate ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: cream from milk and prepare other milk

Occupation_574: Qualification Pack Details: 6121.0201 QP NOS Reference AGR/Q 0502

Occupation_575: Farmer, Dairy/Dairy QP NOS Name Dairy Farmer/Entrepreneur NSQF Level 4

Occupation_576: Code 6121 for production of milk, butter, ghee, etc.

Occupation_577: Title Livestock and Dairy Producers and arranges for their marketing. Selects and buys cattle. Makes proper 6121.0300 arrangements for housing and feeding them and gets them inoculated and Livestock Worker, General vaccinated in time to prevent diseases. Buys and stores feeding supplies. Livestock Worker, General performs any Determines amount of basic feed required combination of following tasks to bed, and prepared it by mixing oil cakes, feed, water, load and unload, weigh, mark roughages and minerals (salt and lime) in and segregate livestock awaiting slaughter desired quantity. Gives regulated diet to in ranch, sales or slaughter yard or in animals. Arranges their grazing on transit. Drives livestock into pens, killing available pastures. Ensures guarding of or loading trucks or railway waggons. animals from wandering and being lost, Weighs animals separately or in truck lots eating poisonous and harmful plants, and segregates them according to weight, drinking polluted water and mating with age, colour, and physical condition. Tags, stray animals. Selects and pairs animals paints or tattoos identifying marks on for breeding. Tends animals during birth livestock to signify ownership or grade of VOLUME II B 17 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 animal. Records weights and grades for Livestock Worker cleans pens, feeding, each animal processed. Scatters bedding watering and taking care of livestock. May material such as saw dust or straw in pens be designated as FURB EARING ANIMAL and maintains supply of water in watering WORKER if engaged in looking after tanks. Feeds livestock with hay, grain, or furbearing animals. other prepared feed as required. Cleans ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: pens, using hose, fork, shovel or rake. May Code 6121 apply liniment or other remedies to Title Livestock and Dairy Producers livestock when illness or injury is detected. May be designated according to 6121.0601 task performed. Dairy Farm Worker, General/Dairy Worker ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_578: Title Livestock and Dairy Producers dairy farm livestock of resident and non- resident owner. Attends to herd of 6121.0400 feeding cows and buffaloes and aiding in

Occupation_579: Herdsman calving, dehorning and vaccination. Keeps, barns, stalls, containers and dairy

Occupation_580: Herdsman; Grazier takes cattle and other equipment in clean and sanitary domestic animals out for grazing on own condition. Milks cows and buffaloes as or employer’s behalf. Collects animals required by hand or by machine. May mix every morning from different houses. and blend feed for farm livestock and

Occupation_581: Takes them out to available pastures for keep dairy records such as feed grazing in field. Keeps watch over them consumed, individual milk production, from being lost or strayed. Guards them gestation periods of cows and buffaloes from eating poisonous and harmful plants etc. May perform other tasks as directed. or drinking polluted water and indiscriminate mating with stray animals.

Occupation_582: Identifies animals in heat and arranges for Qualification Pack Details: pairing. Collects and counts them in QP NOS Reference AGR/Q 0501 evening and drives them back to their QP NOS Name Dairy Worker respective places. Ties them at fixed NSQF Level 2 places or hands them over to owners.

Occupation_583: May render first aid and assist in treating ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: minor injuries of animals. May be

Occupation_584: Title Livestock and Dairy Producers grazing and herding sheep and goats. 6121.0700

Occupation_585: Title Livestock and Dairy Producers and cleans milk cattle, collects various feeds mixes them and feeds animals 6121.0500 before milking. Regulates timing of Livestock Workers/Other Livestock milking. Cleans and disinfects buckets and Workers other containers used in milking in sun or VOLUME II B 18 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 vacuum. Ties hind legs of animals and Stableman washes hind quarter with chlorinated water. Cleans udder with plain chlorinated Stableman, Syce grooms, feeds and looks water and messages them by hand. after horses, camels, mules etc., in

Occupation_586: Disinfects hand by washing with stables. Grooms animals by brushing, chlorinated water. Adjusts buckets currying, washing them and trimming between own legs below udder. Presses their manes and tails using hair and metal udders alternatively with fingers to extract brushes, clippers and scissors. Waters milk from them into bucket. Stimulates feeds and exercises animals. Sweeps out flow of milk from udder by repeated stalls and spreads fresh straw. May treat supply of feed. Repeats pressing of udders sick or injured animal according to his to extract maximum milk. Carries bucket knowledge or may report their condition containing milk to specified place of to Veterinarian and follow his medical storing. Treats udder and other minor advice. May harness or saddle animals. injuries by applying antiseptic powder, May repair and recondition harness. May ointment, etc. May sell milk. May prepare train animals for riding or for pulling carts, ghee, butter and cream. tongas, etc. May take animals out for grazing. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:

Occupation_587: Operator tends machine to milk dairy Elephant Keeper tends and looks after cows and buffaloes. Guides cows and feeding, washing and exercising of tame buffaloes into stanchion and cleans teats elephants and supervises general and their udder with disinfectant. cleanliness of their stables. Tethers

Occupation_588: Squeezes teats to collect sample of milk in elephants to ground anchor with chains, strainer cup and examines sample for curd fastened round front and hind legs. Leads and blood. Starts milking machine and elephants to watering places and scrubs attaches cups of machine to teats of cows their hide to remove dirt, ticks and and buffaloes. Removes cups when parasites. Inspects them for sickness or required amount of milk is obtained. Dips injuries and reports uneasiness or cups of machine into disinfectant solution ailments to Mahout or Veterinarian. after each animal is milked. Empties milk Treats elephants as directed by them. receptacles and cleans and sterilizes Gathers fodder and feeds animals with equipment. masalas (Special food mixture). Files foot nails and sweeps refuse from stables. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Straps howdah (riding arrangement) on its

Occupation_589: Code 6121 back and prepares elephant for ride, when

Occupation_590: Title Livestock and Dairy Producers desired. May polish and maintain ‘howdahs’ and paint forehead and trunk 6121.1000 of elephant with attractive design on VOLUME II B 19 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6 ceremonial occasions. May act as guide 6121.1400 and answer queries of visitors. May cut off Grass Cutter excessive growth of tusk by sawing under guidance of Mahout. May assist in training

Occupation_591: Grass Cutter cuts grass from fields and wild elephants and tending young calves. gardens with sickle or other grass cutting

Occupation_592: May ride elephants in absence of Mahout. implements, for feeding cattle or other animals. Mixes different varieties of grass ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: to make feed palatable to animals. Carries

Occupation_593: Code 6121 grass to stable or to market for sale. Keeps

Occupation_594: Title Livestock and Dairy Producers tools sharp. May feed grass to animals.

Occupation_595: May cut hay and other fodder into small 6121.1200 pieces with hand or mechanically

Occupation_596: Shearer, Sheep collects sheep at shearing ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: yard. Shears wool closely from sheep, Code 6121 clipping carefully to avoid cutting or Title Livestock and Dairy Producers nicking its skin. Gathers black and white wool in separate piles. Keeps clippers 6121.9900 sharpened. May deliver wool to storing Dairy and Livestock Producers, yard.

Occupation_597: Title Livestock and Dairy Producers necessary operations to breed, raise and tend livestock to be used as working, 6121.1300 sporting, or pet animals, as well as for

Occupation_598: Shearer, Animal, Other/Shearer, meat, milk, hair, hides and other products

Occupation_599: Other Animals for sale or delivery on a regular basis to wholesale buyers, marketing

Occupation_600: Shearer Animals cuts with scissors or organizations or at markets not elsewhere clippers hair or bristles of its skin. Gathers classified. black and white wool in horses, camels, pigs and other animals, not elsewhere ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: classified. Ties and immobilises animal Code 6121 before clipping. Selects suitable clipping Title Livestock and Dairy Producers instrument and closely clips hair or bristles taking care not to cut or nick its Family 6122 skin. Maintains and sharpens tools. May sort bristles according to size and quality.

