Entry_1: NCO-0201: Sand Moulding Certified Training

Entry_2: NCO-0401: Shuttering & Hoist Operator

Entry_3: NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATIONS-2015 (Code Structure)

Entry_4: Directorate General of Employment www.ncs.gov.in NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATIONS-2015 (Code Structure)

Entry_5: Directorate General of Employment www.ncs.gov.in FOREWORD National Classification of Occupation (NCO) plays a very vital role in maintaining standards of occupation in the country and is regularly used in the network of employment exchanges that constitute the Public Employment Service for Classification of Occupations, job postings and job search. This classification is used in all types of censuses and sample surveys conducted in India especially in data collection, processing, analysis and presentation of survey results besides its wide range of applications in policy formulation and policy analysis. The Directorate General of Employment, Ministry of Labour & Employment,

Entry_6: Government of India is responsible for maintaining and updating the National Classification of Occupation in India aligned with the corresponding International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) of ILO. The first classification was NC0-1946 followed by NC0-1958, NC0- 1968, NC0-2004 and now the current series NC0-2015. The National Classification of Occupations-2015 (NC0-2015) is aligned with International Standard Classification of Occupations-2008 (ISC0-2008). 2. NCO is a classification of occupations which describes and assigns codes to the various occupations in the country and aligns it with the ISCO. These codes are reviewed and updated periodically to reflect developments in the labour market, particularly with the emergence of new occupations, as well as to align with changes in the international standard. These codes also help in promoting international comparability of statistical data relating to occupations. These occupational standards follow a scientific and hierarchical approach having major, minor and unit groups of classification which has evolved over the years to capture the structural changes in the employment market and current work practices and work environment. 3. The NC0-2015 is a compendium for occupational information available in the Indian economy. The document gives an insight into the occupational framework, nature of duties involved and the level of skill requirement to perform the activities in a real time work situation. The users of NCO may make use of the information for vocational guidance, career counselling and various surveys and studies undertaken by user agencies. The NC0-2015 has also been mapped with the National Industrial Classification (NIC) and Qualification Packs National Occupational Standards (QP-NOS) to cater to the structural changes in the labour market. Furthermore, NC0-2015 framework is dynamic enough to capture and reflect the newly emerging occupations in the industry. 4. The current volume of NCO details out the job description of 3600 civilian occupations covering 52 sectors, as compared to the earlier series of NCO i.e. NC0-2004, which contained the job descriptions for 2945 occupations. The NC0-2015 has 8 digit coding structure which was mapped and aligned to ISC0-2008 with the addition of 2 digits. There is one to one correspondence between ISC0-2008 and the NC0-2015 with the first digit representing the

Entry_7: Division (Major GroupL second digit representing Sub-Division (Sub-Major GroupL third digit representing the Group (Minor Group) and the fourth digit representing the Family (Unit

Entry_8: GroupL a decimal is introduced after the first four digits in order to create a distinction between the Families and individual Occupations. The NC0-2015 is in two Volumes viz. Vol I & II (A& B) where Vol I gives the abstract of Occupations along with their concordance to the earlier NC0-2004. Vol II gives the detailed descriptions ofthe occupations. I i 5. The Ministry is implementing the National Career Service (NCS) Project as a Mission Mode Project for modernising and transforming the network of employment exchanges and

Entry_9: Model Career Centres are being set up in collaboration with States. The NCS Portal is operational at www.ncs.gov.in and aims to link job seekers with employment opportunities along with rich career content. The NCO Codes are integrally enmeshed in the NCS initiative and facilitates efficient job matching. The NCO Codes may be used by varied stakeholders in making information in the employment market more transparent and objective. Soft copies of the publication is available on the NCS portal. 6. The NC0-2015 series has been evolved along with career content to contribute to the knowledge repository of career options. More details on the classification, as well as the principles, scope and structure of the classification are available on the National Career

Entry_10: Service (www.ncs.gov.in) platform. This knowledge repository provides career related information for use by career counsellors and job aspirants across the country and aims at supporting policy makers, students, job seekers, persons returning to the labour force, investors and employers in making better labour market decisions. 7. I am confident that the publication will prove useful in classifying occupations for official work, survey and research work, international comparisons on the demand and supply of workforce and many more such areas. I place on record my appreciation for all the stakeholders who have contributed their valuable inputs in the publication. I also take this opportunity to extend my thanks to the members of the Expert Group on the career content who have examined and vetted the contents of this publication/documents. I also extend my thanks to the officers of the Directorate lead by Mr. Pravin Srivastava, Deputy Director

Entry_11: General (Employment) for timely coordination with all the stakeholders involved in this initiative. --~~Lj- (P.P. Mitra)

Entry_12: Principal Labour & Employment Advisor and Director General Employment II ii J3.J1=J ~ x~ \J1 ~ II "l +-t ?II C'1 q wFcffi J3.{1=J ~ ~ 3i!lc0<'1, ~o~o~o ~ ~-110001 ~urm\ '+fRtl 'fl i( ¢I i( ~ "ff#rq Tele : 91-11-23 71 02 65 MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT

Entry_13: Fax : 91-11-23 35 56 79 SHANKAR AGGARWAL, I.A.S. SHRAM SHAKTI BHAVAN E-mail :secy-labour@nic.in

Entry_14: Secretary to Govt. of India NEW DELHI-110001 D.O. No. D,GE-11/01/2016-VG/01

Entry_15: Dated: 1 7 J 5 f :L_o I f, Subject: Release of the National Classification of Occupation (NCO), 2015 series.

Entry_16: The Directorate General of Employment (DGE) is responsible for revising and maintaining the National Classification of Occupations (NCO) on the lines of International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) of the ILO. The codes are used for classification of occupations by the employment exchanges and census/survey organisations of the

Entry_17: Central and State government. These codes are revised from time to time to capture the changes in occupational patterns and structural changes in the economy. The codes also help in promoting International comparability of statistical data relating to occupations. The first set of occupation standards (ISCO) was brought out by the International Labour

Entry_18: Organisation (ILO) in 1958 and revised from time to time, the latest being the 2008 series. The corresponding series in the Indian National Classification of Occupation (NCO) were 1958, 1967 and 2004. These occupational standards follow a scientific and hierarchical approach having major, minor and unit groups of classification which has evolved over the years to capture the structural changes in the employment market. The NCO codes are extensively used by the employment exchanges and other data/survey collection agencies like the Ministry of Statistics & PI (NSSO, CSO), Census Commissioner & RGI, NITI Aayog, IAMR, State Governments, Academic Institutions etc. 2. The current national series (NC0-2004) was based on the ISC0-1988 series and required updation to capture information on the new occupations that have emerged, especially on account of liberalisation and globalisation. In the meanwhile, the Ministry began implementing the National Career Service as a Mission Mode Project for modernising and transforming the network of employment exchanges and 100 Model Career Centres are being set up in collaboration with States. The NCS Portal is operational at www.ncs.gov.in and aims to link job seekers with employment opportunities along with rich career content. III iii The NCO Codes are integrally enmeshed in the NCS initiative and facilitates efficient job matching. The NCO - 2015 code is in 2 volumes, the first giving the abstract occupations along with their concordance to the earlier NC0-2004 series and the second volume giving the detailed occupational description. A hard copy of the first volume is enclosed for ready reference. It is requested that the NCO Codes may be used by all stakeholders in making information in the employment market more transparent and objective. Soft copies of these publications are available on the attached CD and also on the NCS portal. 3. I request that information about the publication be circulated to the various

Entry_19: Departments and other users and its usage may be ensured by sending various statistical returns using these revised codes. We look forward to suggestions for improvement in the NCO codes and these may kindly be sent at feedback.dget@nic.in.

Entry_20: All Secretary, GOI Ministries and Departments (As per list attached) IV iv ~ ~) \J14 11 '( n;i=?lrr.lC "':TTT<Q ~~~ -;:ffl ~-11 0001 ~ 3BtCll<1, 3l"nfo~o~o

Entry_21: Tele : 91-11-23 71 02 65 ~ '<"l'<ctll'< cf; ~ MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT Fax : 91-11-23 35 56 79 SHANKAR AGGARWAL, I.A.S. SHRAM SHAKTI BHAVAN E-mail :secy-labour@nic.in

Entry_22: Secretary to Govt. of India NEW DELHI-110001 D.O. No. DGE-11/01/2016-VG/01

Entry_23: Dated: t l / .>/ ;;ur.r-£ Subject: Release of the National Classification of Occupation (NCO), 2015 series.

Entry_24: All Secretary, GOI Ministries and Departments {As per list attached) VI vi

Entry_25: Table of Contents 1 Introduction to Classification of 1 - 32 Occupations 2 Concordance Table 33 - 238 3 Alphabetical Index 239 - 371 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction INTRODUCTION TO CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATIONS

Entry_26: Classification group organizes information meaningfully and systematically into a standard format that is useful for determining the similarity of ideas, events, objects or persons. The preparation of a classification group means the creation of an exhaustive and structured set of mutually exclusive and well-described categories often presented as a hierarchy that is reflected by the numeric or alphabetical codes assigned to them. Classification of occupation is used in the national context for the collection and dissemination of statistics from sources such as population censuses, labour market surveys, employer surveys, and other sources. It is also used by the Government and other organizations in activities such as administration of worker’s compensation, matching jobseekers with job vacancies, and management of employment-related migration. The classification of occupation is a categorization of individual occupations on the kind of work and skill-level involved in that particular occupation. It is intended that all the job titles in the nation can be assigned to one (and only one) of these categories or codes. 1. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND NCO 2015 NCO 2004 NCO 1968 NCO 1958 NCO 1946 1946 1958 1968 1988 2004 2008 2015 ISCO 1958 ISCO 1968 ISCO 1988 ISCO 2008 VOLUME I 1 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATION IN INDIA: 1946 TO 2015 1.1 National Classification of Occupations (NCO) 1946 The first effort in the direction of preparing an occupational classification system in India was made by the then Directorate General of Resettlement and Employment, DGRE (later called the

Entry_27: Directorate General of Employment and Training (DGE&T) and now referred to as Directorate General of Training (DGT) ) in 1946 in bringing out a publication titled “Guide to Occupational Classification” primarily to be used by employment service for day-to-day work at the

Entry_28: Employment Exchanges such as registration of applicants, documentation of vacancies, compilation of statistical data, etc. It was an industrial-based classification and was framed after the British pattern. 1.2 National Classification of Occupations (NCO) 1958

Entry_29: International Labour Organization (ILO) brought out the first International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) in 1958 with a view to bring out a complete occupational classification system, which could help in promoting international comparability of statistical data relating to occupations. DGE&T accordingly took up the work of preparing an NCO on the lines of ISCO and brought out “National Classifications of Occupations – 1958”. NCO – 1958 contained detailed information about 1990 occupations in the following hierarchical pattern: 11 Occupational Divisions (one digit code number) 75 Occupational Groups (two digit code number) 331 Occupational Families (three digit code number) 1990 Occupations (five digit code number) VOLUME I 2 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 1.3 National Classification of Occupations (NCO) 1968 Both the ILO and the DGE&T continued to work for the improvement of their respective classification systems. The ILO introduced a number of changes in the ISCO – 58 viz. called it ISCO – 66, applied the principle of ‘type of work performed’ more rigidly, and revised the Major,

Entry_30: Minor, and Unit Groups (corresponding to NCO Divisions, Groups, and Families) of the classification. In order to ensure that NCO – 68 is compatible with ISCO – 66, DGE&T revised the code structure so that the new NCO, called NCO – 68, would be patterned after the ISCO – 66.

Entry_31: While adopting the ISCO – 66 code structure, deviations were made, wherever necessary, to suit the Indian conditions and settings. This edition attempted to group together occupations according to similarity of work performed and contained information about 2484 occupations on the following hierarchical pattern: 8 Occupational Divisions (one digit code number) 95 Occupational Groups (two digit code number) 462 Occupational Families (three digit code number) 2484 Occupations (five digit code number) This was a 5 digit classification system, which gave a unique title to every occupation (called the

Entry_32: Standard Title) and in some cases alternative titles have also been given. This classification gave definitions of the occupations, a brief outline of the main tasks, and functions of each occupation thus bringing out the difference between one occupation and another. In this classification system, the grouping of occupations was based on the fundamental criteria of ‘type of work performed’. Accordingly, occupations were classified in the NCO – 68 so that all the workers engaged in the same type of work are grouped together irrespective of the industrial classification of establishments where they are engaged. For example, all clerical workers have been classified in one occupational group whether they are engaged in a factory, mine, VOLUME I 3 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction government office or even a shop. Similarly, drivers have been grouped together, and so are those engaged in services. The branch of economic activity (industry), in which a job occurs, did not affect the classification of occupations in the NCO – 68.

Entry_33: However, this classification system did not take into account the skill involved in the performance of various occupations. This means, in effect, that occupations having similar nature of work, though requiring varied levels of skill for their performance, were grouped together. 1.4 National Classification of Occupations (NCO) 2004

Entry_34: After a gap of about 3 decades the NCO – 04 was brought out. During this period, the economic, social, industrial, and agrarian fields underwent drastic changes. Globalization and economic liberalization had infused competitiveness amongst various industries. This led to changes in the work process and skill level of the workers. This also brought in a totally new class of jobs and functions.

Entry_35: The International Labour Organization (ILO) revised ISCO – 66 on the recommendation of the

Entry_36: International Conference of Labour Statisticians and brought out ISCO – 88. It was developed to facilitate international comparisons of occupational statistics and to serve as a model for countries developing or revising their national occupational classifications. The ILO came out with a new version wherein not only the work performed, but also the skill level required was considered in the codification of occupations. ISCO – 88 had three main aims namely: i. To facilitate international communication about occupations by supplying national statisticians with a tool to make national occupational data available internationally VOLUME I 4 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction ii. To make it possible for international occupational data to be produced in a form that can be useful for research as well as for specific decision-making and action-oriented activities. These activities could connect with international migration or job placement. iii. To serve as a model for countries developing or revising their national occupational classifications. However, ISCO – 88 was not intended to replace any existing national classification of occupations as the occupational classification systems of different countries was required to reflect the structure of their individual national labour markets. The framework necessary for designing and constructing ISCO – 88 was created in such a way that it not only defined the kind of work performed, but also the skill required to perform that particular job effectively. A “job” has been defined as a set of tasks and duties performed by one person and an “occupation” as a set of jobs whose tasks and duties are of a similar nature. “Skill” has been defined as the ability to carry out the tasks and duties of a given job, which encompasses two dimensions namely: i. Skill Level: A function that describes the range of the tasks and duties involved ii. Skill Specialization: Shows the field of knowledge required, the tools and machinery used, the materials worked on, and the kinds of goods and services produced

Entry_37: In view of the international character of the classification, only four, broad skill levels were used.

Entry_38: This classification of skill levels was more or less based on the educational categories and levels, which appear in the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED). It is also worth keeping in view that the focus was on the skills required to carry out the tasks and duties of an occupation and not on whether a worker working in a particular occupation is more or less skilled than another worker in the same occupation. VOLUME I 5 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction

Entry_39: Level Requirements I Typically involves the performance of simple and routine Primary physical or manual tasks Education II Typically involves the performance of tasks such as operating a Secondary machinery and electronic equipment, driving vehicles, Education maintenance and repair of electrical and mechanical equipment, and manipulation, ordering, and storage information III Typically involves performance of complex technical and First University practical tasks that require an extensive body of factual, Degree technical, and procedural knowledge in a specialized field IV Typically involves the performance of tasks that require Post-Graduate complex problem-solving, decision-making, and creativity University based on an extensive body of theoretical and factual Degree knowledge in a specialized field

Entry_40: The ISCO – 88 had the following hierarchical structure: 1. Major Groups: 10 2. Sub-Major Groups: 28 3. Minor Groups: 116 4. Unit Groups: 390

Entry_41: The ten Major Groups in ISCO – 88 are: 1. Legislators, Senior Officials, and Managers 2. Professionals 3. Technicians & Associate Professionals 4. Clerks 5. Service Workers and Shop and Market Sales Workers 6. Skilled Agricultural and Fishery Workers 7. Craft and Related Trades Workers 8. Plant and Machinery Operators and Assemblers VOLUME I 6 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 9. Elementary Occupations 10. Armed Forces

Entry_42: Significantly, the concept of skill level has not been applied in the case of legislators, senior officials, and managers based on information from national sources. Skills for executing task and duties of these occupations vary to such an extent that it is not feasible to link them with any of the four, broad ISCO – 88 skill levels. 1.4.1 Revision of NCO 1968 to NCO 2004

Entry_43: The exercise on Revision of NCO – 1968 was undertaken by DGE&T through State Directorates of

Entry_44: Employment and Vocational Rehabilitation Centres for Handicapped under the aegis of the DGE&T. A core group comprising technical committee called the Steering Committee was formed having members drawn from the various organizations like government bodies, ministries, universities, and research institutes.

Entry_45: The Steering Committee recommended that a Core Group maybe formed to constantly guide and advise the DGE&T study team in their work. Accordingly, a Core Group was set-up having members drawn from the following organizations: 1. Directorate General of Employment & Training (DGE&T) 2. Central Statistical Organization 3. National Sample Survey Organization 4. Registrar General of India 5. Department of Small Scale Industries 6. State Director of Employment, NCT, Delhi 7. State Director of Employment, Andhra Pradesh A job analysis schedule was designed for collection of occupational information from various sources. The schedule was designed on the basis of occupational and educational information VOLUME I 7 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction available through the reports on Occupational Educational Pattern of Employees published under the Employment Market Information (EMI) programme of the DGE&T and other relevant sources. The job analysis schedule was designed to cover all aspects of an occupation. For the convenience of the job analysts, and to maintain uniformity, detailed guidelines for filling the job analysis schedules and highlighting the steps involved for collecting data for each item were specified in the schedule. Most of the officers who were put on the job of collection of occupational information on the job analysis schedules were drawn from EMI Units and VRCs where collection of occupational information forms are a regular feature of their jobs. The job analysis schedule was pre-tested in six states namely Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,

Entry_46: Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, and Gujarat through the six Vocational Rehabilitation Centres for

Entry_47: Handicapped (VRCs) functioning in these states. The data collected by the VRCs was analysed and the details about the same occupations coming from different VRCs were cross-checked. The schedule was then finalized and approved by the Core Group for adoption in the field.

Entry_48: Employment Exchanges and Vocational Rehabilitation Centres collect labour market information so as to know about newly emerging areas and those going out of existence so that the jobseekers can be guided for gainful activities such as self-employment, etc. 1.4.2 NCO 2004 Methodology

Entry_49: Since the primary source of collecting information is the “establishment”, it was necessary to ensure the widest coverage of the establishments. To achieve this wide coverage, following knowledge/information repositories were considered: i. Employers’ register maintained by the National Employment Service for their Employment

Entry_50: Market Information Programme ii. Lists of employers organizations iii. List of establishments compiled by NSSO for conducting Annual Survey of Industries, etc. The final framework was prepared by the Employment Market Information Units, which is as follows: VOLUME I 8 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction

Entry_51: The Employment Market Information Units were asked to update their employers’ registers by utilizing the data available from various sources like: 1. List of establishments compiled by NSSO for conducting annual survey of industries 2. Consultation with websites hoisted by corporate sector 3. Consultation with private placement agencies to the extent possible 4. Utilization of records maintained by various offices of state governments such as the ones maintained by:  The office of Inspector of Shops & Establishments  The office of Chief Inspector of Factories  The office of Inspector of Schools  The office of Local Mines Inspector  The office of District Industries Officer  The office of District Treasury Officer  Records from the Small Industries Service Institute  Employers’ Associations, etc. 1.4.3 Coverage of Unorganized Sector Unorganised sector was also covered by the VRCs during the course of job development work, particularly under the community-based rehabilitation programme in which the main thrust was on identifying occupations in the non-formal sector. 1.4.4 Collection Through Secondary Sources In addition to information collected by the job analysts through sample survey, efforts were made to collect data through various secondary sources like all the national and major regional newspapers, leading magazines, and the Internet. Occupational classification systems of other countries were also consulted to locate newly emerging occupations which have a relevance to the Indian conditions. Apart from this, other VOLUME I 9 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction organizations like RGI, CSO, NSSO, etc. also provided very useful inputs that served valuable for deciding on new occupations. 1.4.5 Co-Ordination and Liaising

Entry_52: Since a large number of officers belonging to various agencies were involved in the whole exercise, co-ordination and liaising between various agencies was achieved firstly through distribution of the detailed Manual of Procedure on Revision of NCO to each and every officer involved in the process. Secondly, constant touch through correspondence, telephone, fax, and e- mail, etc. was maintained by the DGE&T study team with all those involved in the exercise. The field analysts were encouraged to get even the slightest doubts cleared. 1.4.6 Processing of the Job Analysis Schedules A large volume of data thus collected became available at DGE&T Headquarters, which was classified according to NIC codes. The job descriptions of the same occupation received from different sources were edited and consolidated to have an average picture of the job duties of the occupation. These average pictures were then compared with the job descriptions of the existing occupations to identify new occupations. Duplication was taken care out to ensure inclusion of only new occupations. 1.4.7 Skill Level Before codifying all the occupations on the pattern of ISCO – 88, the skill levels as defined in the ISCED were modified to suit the Indian conditions taking particular cognizance of informal skill. In the Indian context, the skills necessary to perform the tasks and duties of a given job can be acquired not only through formal education but also through informal training and experience.

Entry_53: The four skill levels thus defined for NCO – 04 vis-à-vis the skill levels defined in ISCO – 88 are as given below:

Entry_54: Skill Level ISCO – 88 Educational NCO – 2004 Educational Requirements

Entry_55: Requirements I Primary Education Up to 10 years of formal education and/or informal VOLUME I 10 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction skills II Secondary Education 11-13 years of formal education III First University Degree 14-15 years of formal education IV Post-Graduate University More than 15 years of formal education

Entry_56: Degree The skill level of each newly identified occupation was decided on the basis of information about academic and technical qualifications and experience requirement as also the average job description of the occupation to see whether the job requirement was of administrative, managerial, and supervisory nature or of a subordinate/repetitive nature in the Indian context.

Entry_57: In keeping with the skill levels defined above to suit the Indian conditions, following divisions were classified in tune with the defined skill levels to accommodate occupations: NCO 2004 Title Skill Level

Entry_58: Divisions 1 Legislators, Senior Officials, and Managers Not Defined* 2 Professionals IV 3 Associate Professionals III 4 Clerks II 5 Service Workers and Shop & Market Sales Workers II 6 Skilled Agricultural and Fishery Workers II 7 Craft and Related Trades Workers II 8 Plant and Machine Operators and Assemblers II 9 Elementary Occupations I X Workers not Classified by Occupations - VOLUME I 11 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction * The concept of skill level was not applied in the case of legislators, senior officials, and managers as skills for executing task and duties of these occupations varied to such an extent that it was not be feasible to link them with any of the four, broad skill levels. 1.4.8 Levels of Aggregation In keeping with the pattern of classification of occupations adopted in ISCO – 88, it was decided to have one more level of aggregation between Division and Group called Sub-Division. The nomenclature for different levels of aggregation is as under: NCO – 68 ISCO – 88 NCO – 2004 DIVISION MAJOR GROUP DIVISION GROUP SUB-MAJOR GROUP SUB-DIVISION FAMILY MINOR GROUP GROUP - - - UNIT GROUP FAMILY OCCUPATION - - - - - - - - - - - - OCCUPATION 1.4.9 Finalization and Codification The focus in NCO – 2004 was on the skills required to carry out the tasks and duties of an occupation and not on whether the worker holding a particular occupation was more skilled than another worker in the same occupation. In case of multi-skill occupations, the coding was done on the basis of the predominant skill required to perform the tasks in a job role. All the 2945 Occupations (both existing and newly identified) were grouped together according to combinations of specific duties, tasks, and work functions. They were grouped in such a way that the job roles performed were the same or closely related. Each occupation was assigned a six digit code, a distinct title (in some cases alternative titles have also been provided), and a definition. VOLUME I 12 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction NCO 2004 Code Structure Number of Units Six Digits Code Number Denoted by

Entry_59: Family 439 First four digits of code number Occupations 2945 Last two decimal digits of the code number The occupations have been first assigned to the ten Occupational Divisions (identified by the initial digit in the code number) on the basis of their job description. The first code indicates the Division in which the job falls under. The first and second code indicates the Sub-Division under which the job role falls. The first three digits make up the Group of the job role, and the first four digits together make the Family under which the job role is categorized. The last two digits indicate the unique code for that particular job role. Disaggregation after Family have been made to accommodate initially up to nine ‘two digit’ codes within each Family keeping a provision for accommodating up to 99 Occupations in each Family. In a Family, the relation between occupations was determined by the similarity of characteristics of work done and the level of skill. The most important feature of a Family was that the Occupations included were closely related to each other than to Occupations outside the Family. The last two digits of the code numbers for the individual Occupations within a Family were numbered in sequence, usually leaving intervals of 5 or 10 between numbers depending on the number of Occupations to be accommodated within the Family. This also left a scope for accommodating any new Occupations that maybe identified later without disturbing the basic code structure. Shorter intervals between the code numbers of two consecutive Occupations VOLUME I 13 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction were kept to denote the close proximity of the nature of work of the two Occupations whereas larger intervals would denote dissimilarity of the nature of work of the two Occupations. A period (.) separates the final two digits from the code number of the Family.

Entry_60: The revision of NCO – 2004 was carried out in line with the approach adopted by ILO in its ISCO – 88. As such, all the Unit Groups in ISCO – 88 were adopted as Families at 4 digit level, even though in some cases no Occupations at the specified skill level were identified so far. This was done to accommodate Occupations, which may become available in the near future.

Entry_61: Owing to introduction of the concept of skill level and new aggregation at six digit level in the NCO – 2004 classification, the code structure was radically changed. This resulted into breaking up and/or merger of some Divisions, Groups, and Families of the 1968 version. Due to this, exact equivalents of all the codes in the 68 version may not be available.

Entry_62: As in the earlier editions, separate codes were not provided for apprentices, foremen, and instructors (in-plant). These maybe classified by prefixing ‘A’, ‘B’ or ‘C’ respectively before the code number of the occupation which is being learned, supervised or instructed. VOLUME I 14 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 2. National Classification of Occupations – 2015

Entry_63: Globalization of the labour market has increased the demand for internationally comparable occupational data for both statistical and administrative purposes. In India, there is a huge gap between jobseekers and job providers, training institutions, and related industries. In the last ten years, there has been a sea of change in almost all the sectors as most jobs have become mechanized or computerized. These changes need to reflect in the NCO as well. Therefore, the first step to achieve the vision of connecting youth with job opportunities was to create a fresh new repository of occupations.

Entry_64: In 2015, Training wing of DGE&T has become a part of the Ministry of Skills Development and

Entry_65: Entrepreneurship whereas the Employment wing is responsible for NCO – 2015.

Entry_66: The main objectives of updating the NCO are:  To create a useful model for the development of National Classifications of Occupations (NCO)  To make NCO – 2015 compatible to ISCO – 2008 so that it is relevant for international reporting, comparisons, and exchange of statistical and administrative information about occupations 2.1 Need for Revision

Entry_67: Currently, the employability and vocational skills upgradation sectors in India are undergoing a paradigm shift. The dynamics and outlook towards labour is increasingly becoming market- responsive and driven by constantly evolving needs. Simultaneously, the employment aspirational quotient and needs of individuals who seek employment have already evolved and are closely aligned with global trends and factors. Aligning to these factors and requirements, the DGE&T has envisioned a multidimensional approach for evolution. DGE&T envisaged aligning and upgrading NCO – 2004 using the guided baseline provided by ISCO – 2008. The need for this revision was to get accurate data from the market along with research into sectors/industries and to identify the size and profile of the sectors/industries, types of occupations, key trends, developments, and opportunities for progression. VOLUME I 15 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction

Entry_68: Today’s ease of connectivity with the world and access to technology has made information available to one and all. It is important therefore that all those who seek employment be connected to those who provide it, and sustain them in employment. To address this element, DGE&T created a central portal that will cross-connect the employee to the employer. This portal, after revision of the NCO, will have relevant and comparative information that will assist potential jobseekers to understand, evaluate, and decide on a suitable career entry. 2.2 Mapping the QP NOS to the Job Roles in NCO – 2015

Entry_69: In India, general education and vocational education training have been operating as separate verticals with little interaction between the two. In order to facilitate mobility from vocational to general education, and vice-versa, a national qualification framework was developed. The National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) was brought out by National Skill

Entry_70: Development Agency. NSQF is based on an outcome-based approach and each level in the NSQF is defined and described in terms of competency levels that need to be achieved. The job roles corresponding to each of these competency levels would be ascertained with the involvement of the industry through the Sector Skill Councils (SSCs).

Entry_71: The use of NSQF will make it easier for the institutes, students, and employers to pursue a particular course and address the issues of inequity and disparity in qualifications. As a competency-based and outcome-based qualification framework, NSQF will facilitate Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL). NSQF will also help to align Indian qualifications to international qualifications. The National Occupational Standards (NOS) is one of the most important contributions of the

Entry_72: National Skills Development Corporation (NSDC) to the skills environment of India. This was done in affiliation with the Sector Skill Councils (SSCs). The SSCs are the national partnership organization with NSDC that bring together all the stakeholders – industry, labour, and the academia. VOLUME I 16 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction NOS defines the measurable performance outcomes required from an individual engaged in a particular task. NOS lists down what an individual should know and do while performing a particular task.

Entry_73: The SSCs play a pivotal role in linking the gap between what the industry wants and what should be the curriculum for a skilling programme. One of the functions of the SSC is developing skill competency standards and qualifications, which form the National Occupational Standards (NOS). Essentially NOS are benchmarks of good practice. The set of NOS for a job role is called a QP or

Entry_74: Qualification Packs. The Government has clearly stated that the SSCs will provide their sector- specific competency frameworks or Qualification Packs, which help in both the creation of curriculum and assessments. As the NCO is a comprehensive repository for national occupations, all the QPs released by the various sector/industries through NSDC are mapped to the job roles in the NCO – 2015. A QP NOS in the NCO – 2015 is aligned to a job role wherever an exact match is found. A new job role was added to the NCO where there was no description of a job role specified as per a given QP NOS.

Entry_75: Thus, all the QPs released by the various SSCs are mapped and added during the creation of NCO – 2015. The NCO – 2015 would be updated as and when new QPs are released by the SSCs. The

Entry_76: Employment wing of DGE&T will undertake any alignment of QP NOS to NCO –2015 in the future. 2.3 Outline of the Revision Exercise A five step approach was followed to update the existing NCO – 2004. The exercise was to align the job roles in NCO – 2004 to ISCO – 2008 and also map the job roles to various sectors and industries along with the existing NIC – 2008. The NCO job roles were also classified into jobs that were relevant, needed any modification or were completely obsolete. The Qualification Packs (QP) released by National Skills Development Corporation (NSDC) were also mapped to the NCO – 2015 job roles. VOLUME I 17 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction

Entry_77: The five steps approach is: 1. Aligning existing NCO – 2004 to ISCO – 2008 to create NCO – 2015 2. Mapping the QPs to the job roles in NCO – 2015 3. Coding the NCO – 2015 job roles 4. Mapping the job roles to the sectors/industry 5. Mapping the job roles to NIC – 2008 6. Classifying the job roles as relevant, relevant with modification, and obsolete 2.4 Aligning NCO – 2015 to ISCO – 2008

Entry_78: While aligning NCO – 2004 to ISCO – 2008, it was noticed that a number of completely new Sub-

Entry_79: Major Groups, Minor Groups, and Unit Groups have been introduced to ISCO – 2008. This led to a total revamp of Groups and Families in NCO – 2015. Many existing Families were either split or merged into different Families.

Entry_80: The changes thus made showed that NCO – 2004 was out of date in some areas as a result of the impact of development in technology as many jobs now depended on the use of computers and telecommunications. Thus, the merger or spilt of Families reflected occupational and technological change in the current labour market. During the mapping exercise, the nature of work performed has been given more emphasis than the formal education in determining the skill level of the occupation.

Entry_81: Skill Level ISCO – 08 Educational Requirements NCO – 2015 Educational Requirements I Primary Education Up to 10 years of formal education and/or informal skills II Secondary Education 11-13 years of formal education III First University Degree 14-15 years of formal education IV Post-Graduate University Degree More than 15 years of formal education VOLUME I 18 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction The skill level of each newly identified Occupation was decided on the basis of information about academic and technical qualifications and experience requirement as also the average job description of the occupation to see whether the job requirement was of administrative, managerial, supervisory nature or of a subordinate/repetitive nature in the Indian context.

Entry_82: In keeping with the skill levels defined above to suit Indian conditions, following Divisions were classified in tune with the defined skill levels to accommodate Occupations: NCO 2015 Title Skill Level

Entry_83: The following changes occurred in NCO – 15 after it was aligned/mapped to ISCO – 2008:  Updating job roles linked to the information and technology sector  Expansion of job roles in the health sector  Reorganization of job roles for clerks. This was again reorganized to reflect the rapid growth of information and technology VOLUME I 19 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction  Reorganization of job roles that fall under the categories of sales and service workers, personal service workers , personal care workers, and protective services workers  New Families were added to suit the national requirements  Detailed categorization of job roles in information and services sector like tourism  Division X – Workers not classified by Occupations were removed from NCO – 2015 classification 3. International Classification of Occupations NCO – 2004 followed a six digit coding structure with a decimal after the first four digits. The first four are single digit representation of Division, Sub-Division, Group, and Family respectively. The last two digits of the code, after the decimal, denote the individual Occupation. NCO – 2004 was based on ISCO – 1988 and it is almost a decade since it was updated. Meanwhile, ILO has also published a revised version of ISCO in 2008. Many changes have taken place in the economic, social, industrial, and agrarian fields and have resulted in creation of new jobs and functions in the Indian labour market during this period.

Entry_84: In order to understand and incorporate the best practices across the world, five international Occupational Classifications were studied along with NCO – 2004 as specified below: 1. International Labour Organization – International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) 2. United States of America – Standard Occupation Classification (SCO) 3. Australia & New Zealand – Australian and New Zealand Standard Classification of Occupations (ANZCO) 4. Germany – Klassifikation der Berufe (KlDB) 5. Canada – National Occupational Classification VOLUME I 20 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 3.1 International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) International Labour Organization (ILO) has developed ISCO for the classification of occupations from an international perspective. The latest published version is ISCO – 2008. This classification system contains the following categories: 10 Major Groups 43 Sub-Major Groups 130 Minor Groups 436 Unit Groups ISCO – 2008 has a four digit coding structure with a single digit representation for Major Groups,

Entry_85: Sample Code Sample Code Title 8153 Sewing Machine Operators 3.2 United States of America – Standard Occupation Classification In United States of America, the latest version of Occupational Classification available is the Standard Occupation Classification 2010 (SOC – 2010). This classification system contains following categories: 23 Major Groups 97 Sub-Major Groups 461 Broad Occupations 840 Detailed Occupations VOLUME I 21 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction SOC – 2010 has a six digit coding structure with a representation for Major (2 digits), Minor, Broad Occupation (2 digits), and Detailed Occupations.

Entry_86: Sample Code Sample Code Title 51-6031 Sewing Machine Operator 3.3 Australia and New Zealand – ANZCO Australia and New Zealand Standard Classification of Occupations Version 1.2 (1220.0 ANZCO) is the latest occupational classification available in Australia & New Zealand. This classification system contains the following categories: 8 Major Groups 43 Sub-Major Groups 97 Minor Groups 358 Unit Groups 1024 Occupations ANZCO has a six digit coding structure with representation for Major, Sub-Major, Minor, and Unit Groups and Occupations (2 digits).

Entry_87: Sample Code Sample Code Title 711611 Sewing Machinist 3.4 Germany – Klassifikation der Berufe In Germany, the latest Occupation Classification available is Klassifikation der Berufe 2010 (KldB 2010). This classification system contains the following categories: VOLUME I 22 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 10 Occupational Areas 37 Occupational Main Groups 144 Occupational Groups 700 Occupational Sub-Groups 1286 Occupational Types KldB 2010 has a five digit coding structure with a single digit representation for Occupational Areas, Occupational Main Groups, Occupational Groups, Occupational Sub-Groups, and Occupational Types. The first four digits represent the kind of Occupation and the last digit represents the skill level.

Entry_88: Sample Code Sample Code Title 28222 Occupations in the clothing, hat and cap manufacturing— technically- oriented activities 3.5 Canada – National Occupational Classification In Canada, the latest version of the Occupation Classification available is National Occupational

Entry_89: Classification 2011 (NOC – 2011). This classification system contains the following categories: 10 Broad Occupations 40 Major Groups 140 Minor Groups 400 Unit Groups VOLUME I 23 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction NOC – 2011 has a four digit coding structure with a single digit representation for Broad Occupations, Major, Minor, and Unit Groups. This coding structure is quite similar to the ISCO

Entry_90: Sample Code Sample Code Title 9446 Industrial Sewing Machine Operators VOLUME I 24 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 4. NCO – 2015 Coding Structure

Entry_91: There have been numerous changes in the international sphere, which have been captured in the ISCO – 2008 and other international standards. It was necessary to review the coding structure of NCO to accommodate the changing labour market environment in the country as well as globally. This was done with the help of the National Competency Framework (NSQF), which is an outcome-based approach and functions through the qualifications pack – QP NOS. Based on the analysis of the abovementioned international classifications and the factors impacting skill and labour environment in India, an enhanced framework for the NCO was created. This framework incorporates the following:  Type of occupation  Skill level needed for the occupation  Linkage to the QP NOS and NSQF levels

Entry_92: To accommodate the linkage to QP NOS, an 8 digit coding structure was suggested. An expert committee was established to review and accept the suggested 8 digit coding structure for NCO – 2015. This coding structure was based on the NCO – 2004 coding structure mapped and aligned to ISCO – 2008 with the addition of 2 digits, which will represent the QP NOS.

Entry_93: Coding Structure NCO – 2015 Digits Representation Corresponding Mapping to ISCO – 2008

Entry_94: The first four digits Family Unit Group The first two digits after the decimal Occupation VOLUME I 25 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction

Entry_95: The last two digits after the decimal QP NOS  The first digit of NCO – 2015 will represent the Division (Major Group in ISCO)  The first two digits of NCO – 2015 will represent the Sub-Division (Sub-Major Group in ISCO)  The first three digits of NCO – 2015 will represent the Group (Minor Group in ISCO)  The first four digits of NCO – 2015 will represent the Family (Unit Group in ISCO)  A decimal is introduced after the first four digits in order to create a distinction between the Families and individual Occupations.  The first two digits after the decimal of NCO – 2015 will represent the different occupations that can be combined under the given Family  The last two digits after the decimal in NCO – 2015 shall represent the availability of a QP NOS for the job role.  The value of the last two digits would depend on two scenarios: i. If QP NOS is available, then the value of the last 2 digits after the decimal will be between1-99 (arranged sequentially) ii. If QP NOS is unavailable, then the value of the last two digits after the decimal will remain 00 4.1 NCO 2015 – Illustration of the Code

Entry_96: An illustrative example of the proposed NCO – 2015 code is shown below for the code – 8153.0111 (Sewing Machine Operator, General):

Entry_97: Code: 8153.0111 Job Title: Sewing Machine Operator, General 8 Division In this example, ‘8’ stands for the Division which is

Entry_98: Plant and Machine Operators and Assemblers 81 Sub-Division 81 stands for the Sub-Division of the Occupation, which is Stationary Plant and Machine Operators 815 Group 815 represents the Group under which the occupation VOLUME I 26 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction falls, which is Textiles, Fur and Leather Products

Entry_99: Machine Operators 8153 Family 8153 denotes the Family under which the occupation is listed, which is Sewing Machine Operators 8153.01 Occupation .011 indicates the Occupation under the given Family, which is Sewing Machine Operator, General 8153.0111 Occupation 1 (the last digit in .0111) denotes the QP NOS reference i.e. Sewing Machine Operator published by QP NOS Reference

Entry_100: The NCO – 2015 Coding Structure can accommodate 9999 Families. There can be a maximum of 99 Occupations under each Family. There can be a maximum of 99 QP NOS references per Occupation.

Entry_101: Considering the dynamics of the labour market and addition of new QP NOS by the SSCs over a period of time, the NCO – 2015 codes would be reviewed and updated periodically. This eight digit coding structure provides ample scope for addition of Families or Occupations to the NCO, if required, in the future. 4.2 Mapping the Job Roles to the Sectors/Industry Once the job roles/occupations were mapped as per ISCO – 2008, they were also classified as per the sector/industry in which they fit. This mapping will help the Career Counsellors to guide a jobseeker in gaining the correct job as per the relevant sector. Thus, all the job roles in the newly created NCO – 2015 were mapped to the relevant sectors. The data generated was then shared with experts from the industries for validation. 4.2.1 Mapping the Job Roles to NIC VOLUME I 27 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction Job roles in the NCO – 2015 are also mapped to the National Industrial Classification 2008 (NIC), which is an essential statistical standard for developing and maintaining comparable database according to economic activities. NIC classifies the economic activities under three broad categories viz. primary production (agriculture and mining), secondary production (manufacturing and construction), and services (transport, commerce, administration, etc.)

Entry_102: The NIC – 2008 seeks to provide a basis for the standardized collection, analysis, and dissemination of industry- (economic activity) wise economic data for India. Apart from being the standard industrial classification, NIC is widely used by the government agencies, industry associations, and researchers for various administrative, analytical, and research purposes. Thus linking or mapping the NCO – 2015 would encompass not only the broad-based economic activities, but also all the job roles that would be a part of these activities. NIC – 2008 coding is based on economic activities under various sectors/industries. The activities are broadly classified under various sectors/industries. This classification does not accommodate every job role in a sector. Currently NIC – 2008 has 21 sections (A to U) corresponding to the various sectors. All the NCO – 2015 Occupations have been classified as per sectors and mapped to NIC – 2008. There are certain occupations that may feature in more than one sector. For example, the occupation of Storyboard Artist (NCO – 2015 Code: 2166.0209), which has QP NOS

Entry_103: Reference of Media & Entertainment SSC - MES/Q0507, has employment prospect in multiple economic activities such as activities of individual writers for all subjects including fictional writing, technical writing, etc. (NIC 2008 Code: 90004), Publishing of computer games for all platforms (NIC 2008 Code: 58203), and Video Production (NIC 2008 Code: 59112). 4.3 Classifying the Job Roles NCO – 2015 defines and describes various occupations available in the country giving them standard and alternative occupational titles. As per DG&ET, a job analysis of all job codes was VOLUME I 28 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction essential. The task involved analysis of all job codes in terms of relevance and completeness, and categorizing them in three groups namely:  Relevant (R)  Relevant with Modification (RM)  Redundant/Obsolete (O) It is observed that with time, some job codes have become irrelevant. The reason is that either the job profiles do not exist due to changing requirements of the industry or they may require certain modifications. A thorough study of all job codes was undertaken and each job code was categorised as relevant, relevant with modification, and redundant/obsolete. The break-up of each category is explained below: R – All the previous codes that are relevant according to the current work practices and environment to be marked as R (Relevant) RM – All the previous codes that are relevant according to the current work practices and environment, but with certain modification (like modification in job description, modification/changes in the title, changes/modifications in skill level) to be marked as RM (Relevant with Modification) O – All the previous codes that are no longer relevant to the current work practices and environment to be marked as O (Redundant/Obsolete). Industry experts were consulted to review the NCO – 2015 job roles and validate the categorization of NCO codes as R, RM, and O. The industry experts also validated the cases wherein new codes have been proposed. 5. National Career Service Project (NCSP) 5.1 The National Career Service Project (NCSP) VOLUME I 29 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction

Entry_104: The aim of the Government is to ensure that the aspiring youth of India pursue the right career choice. Keeping this in mind the main objective of the DGE&T is career counselling. Career counselling will not only help the youth to choose the right job for them, but will also help with better skills for enhancing growth and development. Taking this forward, DGE&T and

Entry_105: Government have taken-up the task of establishing a knowledge repository within the National

Entry_106: Career Service Project (NCSP). This knowledge repository shall act as a common, centralized platform to provide career-related information to career counsellors and aspirants across the country. This repository will not only store data, but will also link jobs with the appropriate industrial sectors. Occupations listed and mapped under NCO – 2015 will act as the beginning point of creating career content, which will then form a part of the knowledge repository of the

Entry_107: The aim of the NCSP is:  To provide gainful employment to all jobseekers registered with Employment Exchanges  To facilitate interaction between jobseekers and employers  To disseminate accurate and consistent employment market information to all stakeholders on time

Entry_108: The NCSP, therefore, is a comprehensive and multipronged transformational project with the following key aspects: 5.1.1 Model Career Centres (MCC)

Entry_109: The aim is to transform the current Employment Exchange Offices into Career Counselling

Entry_110: Centres. These career centres would serve as a one-stop-shop for all career related needs of the youth and students seeking counselling and employment. These career centres shall undertake all the activities related to NCSP i.e. establishing inter-linkages with industry for managing the demand side while on the other hand providing counselling and job assistance services to the supply side. VOLUME I 30 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 5.1.2 Developing a Network of Professional Career Counsellors NCSP plans to establish a network of career counsellors. This will be done by transforming the existing Employment Exchange Offices into Career Counselling Centres and also identifying other institutions/agencies that can volunteer in the career counselling activities. The training of the career counsellors will be undertaken by the Training wing of DGE&T. 5.1.3 National Career Service Portal Implementation

Entry_111: The National Career Service Portal will act as a platform to bridge the gap between the government and private job providing ecosystem, jobseeker, and skill development ecosystem. 5.1.4 Maintenance of Knowledge Repository of Career Counselling Content For Employment Exchange Officers to work effectively as Career Counsellors, they need to have access to an updated knowledge repository of various career options and employment opportunities. This content should be renewed on quarterly basis based on the feedback provided by various stakeholders. VOLUME I 31 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction 5.1.5 Inform, Educate, Communicate (IEC) Activities NCSP will work with a variety of partners like NGOs, schools, colleges, jobseekers, skill institutions, employers, volunteer agencies, technology partners, verification agencies, etc. For this, a programme will be developed that will Inform, Educate, Communicate (IEC) to reach out to these partners. VOLUME I 32 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table CONCORDANCE TABLE OF NCO 2015 With Occupational Titles and Equivalent NCO 2004 Codes VOLUME I 33 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Entry_112: Sub- 11 Chief Executives, Senior Officials and Legislators

Entry_113: Family 1111 Legislators 1111.0100 Elected Official, Union Government 1111.10 1111.0200 Elected Official, State Government 1112.10 1111.0300 Elected Official, Local Bodies 1113.10 1111.9900 Legislators, Other 1119.90

Entry_114: Family 1112 Senior Government Officials 1112.0100 Administrative Official, Union Government 1121.10 1112.0200 Diplomat 1121.20 1112.0300 Executive Officials, Union Government 1121.30 1112.0400 Administrative Official, State Government 1122.10 1112.0500 Executive Official, State Government 1122.20 1112.0600 Administrative and Executive Officials, Quasi 1123.10

Entry_115: Government (Central) 1112.0700 Administrative & Executive Officials, Quasi 1123.20

Entry_116: Government (State) 1112.0800 Administrative and Executive Officials, Local 1124.10

Entry_117: Bodies 1112.9900 Senior Government Officials, Other 1129.90

Entry_118: Family 1113 Traditional Chiefs and Heads of Villages VOLUME I 34 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Entry_119: Family 1114 Senior Officials of Special Interest Organizations 1114.0100 Political Worker 1141.10 1114.0200 Senior Officials of Employers, Workers and Other 1142.00

Entry_120: Economic Interest Organizations 1114.0300 Director, Disaster Management Services 1143.10 1114.9900 Senior Officials of Special Interest Organizations, 1143.90

Entry_121: Family 1120 Managing Directors and Chief Executives 1120.0100 Working Proprietor, Electricity 1211.10 1120.0200 Working Proprietor, Gas 1211.20 1120.0300 Working Proprietor, Water Supply 1211.30 1120.0400 Director, Electricity 1211.40 1120.0500 Director, Gas 1211.50 1120.0600 Director, Water Supply 1211.60 1120.0700 Director, Bank 1212.10 1120.0800 Director, Insurance 1212.20 1120.0900 Working Proprietor, Mines/Proprietor, Mines 1213.10 1120.1000 Working Proprietor, Quarry/Proprietor, Quarry 1213.20 1120.1100 Working Proprietor, Well Drilling/Proprietor, 1213.30

Entry_122: Well Drilling 1120.1200 Working Proprietor, Construction/Proprietor, 1213.40

Entry_123: Construction VOLUME I 35 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1120.1300 Director, Construction 1213.50 1120.1400 Director, Mines 1213.60 1120.1500 Director, Quarry 1213.70 1120.1600 Director, Well Drilling 1213.80 1120.1700 Working Proprietor, Manufacturing/Proprietor, 1214.10

Entry_124: Manufacturing 1120.1800 Director Manufacturing 1214.20 1120.1900 Working Proprietor, Wholesale Trade/Proprietor, 1214.30

Entry_125: Wholesale Trade 1120.2000 Working Proprietor, Retail Trade/Proprietor, 1214.40

Entry_126: Retail Trade 1120.2100 Director, Wholesale Trade 1214.50 1120.2200 Director, Retail Trade 1214.60 1120.2300 Working Proprietor, Transport 1215.10 1120.2400 Director, Transport 1215.20 1120.2500 Director, Communication 1215.30 1120.2600 Director, Airport 1215.40 1120.2700 Working Proprietor, Storage and Warehousing 1216.10 1120.2800 Director, Storage and Warehousing 1216.20 1120.2900 Working Proprietor, Lodging and Catering 1217.10

Entry_127: Services 1120.3000 Director, Lodging and Catering Services/Director 1217.20

Entry_128: Food and Beverage Service 1120.3100 Executive Chef 1217.30 VOLUME I 36 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1120.3200 Working Proprietor, Recreation and 1218.10

Entry_129: Entertainment 1120.3300 Director, Recreation and Entertainment 1218.20 1120.3400 Station Director, Radio/TV 1218.30 1120.3401 Account Director ( Advertising Agency) 1120.3402 Sales Director (Media Org) 1120.3500 Working Proprietor, Other Services 1219.10 1120.3600 Director, Other Services 1219.20 1120.3700 Director, Museum/Zoo 1219.30 1120.3800 Chief Librarian 1219.40 1120.3900 Principal, College 1219.50 1120.9900 Managing Directors and Chief Executives, Others 1211.90

Entry_130: Group 121 Business Services and Administration Managers

Entry_131: Family 1211 Finance Managers 1211.0100 General Manager, Bank 1307.10 1211.0200 General Manager, Insurance 1307.20 1211.0300 Purser, Ship 1231.10 1211.9900 Finance Managers, Others 1231.9

Entry_132: Family 1212 Human Resource Managers 1212.0100 Personnel Manager 1232.10 1212.9900 Personnel and Industrial Relations Managers, 1232.90 VOLUME I 37 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Entry_133: Family 1213 Policy and Planning Managers 1213.0100 Manager, Automotive Service 1239.10 1213.0101 Quality Assurance Standards In-Charge 1213.0102 Manager – Customer Quality 1213.0200 Manager, Automotive Service Station 1239.20 1213.0201 Area Service Manager 1213.0202 Territory Service Manager 1213.9900 Managers, Other Services 1239.90

Entry_134: Family 1219 Business Services and Administration Managers

Entry_135: Not Elsewhere Classified 1219.0100 Manager, Import and Export 1227.30 1219.0101 Export Manager 1219.0200 Manager, Health Club/Manager, Fitness 1228.10

Entry_136: Group 122 Sales, Marketing and Development Managers

Entry_137: Family 1221 Sales and Marketing Managers 1221.0100 Sales Manager (Wholesale Trade) 1233.10 1221.0200 Sales Manager (Retail Trade) 1233.20 1221.0301 Home Delivery Manager 1221.0401 Territory Sales Manager (Broadband) 1221.0501 Territory Sales Manager (Prepaid) 1221.0601 Sales Co-Ordinator (Media Org) VOLUME I 38 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1221.0602 Sales Manager (Media Org) 1221.9900 Sales and Marketing Managers, Other 1233.90

Entry_138: Family 1222 Advertising and Public Relation Managers 1222.0100 Manager, Advertising and Promotion 1234.10 1222.0102 Advertising Operations Co-Ordinator (Digital) 1222.0200 Manager, Fashion/Fashion Manager 1234.20 1222.9900 Advertising and Public Relations Department 1234.90

Entry_139: Family 1223 Research and Development Managers 1223.0101 Manager Testing Facility 1223.0102 Manager Material Testing 1223.0201 Research Associate

Entry_140: Sub- 13 Production and Specialized Services Managers

Entry_141: Group 131 Production Managers in Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries

Entry_142: Family 1311 Agricultural and Forestry Production Managers 1311.0100 General Manager, Plantation 1301.20 1311.0200 General Manager, Horticulture 1301.30 1311.0300 General Manager, Agricultural Farm 1301.10 1311.0400 General Manager, Livestock Farm 1301.40 1311.0500 General Manager, Dairy Farm 1301.50 1311.0600 General Manager, Poultry 1301.60 VOLUME I 39 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1311.0700 Manager, Agricultural Farm 1221.10 1311.0800 Manager, Plantation 1221.20 1311.0900 Manager, Nursery 1221.22 1311.0901 Rubber Nursery Manager 1311.1000 Manager, Aerial Planting and Cultivation 1221.24 1311.1100 Manager, Orchard 1221.26 1311.1200 Manager, Horticulture Farm 1221.30 1311.1300 Manager, Livestock Farm 1221.40 1311.1400 Manager, Dairy Farm 1221.50 1311.1500 Manager, Poultry Farm 1221.60 1311.9900 Agricultural and Forestry Production Managers, 1221.90

Entry_143: Family 1312 Aquaculture and Fisheries Production Managers

Entry_144: Family 1321 Manufacturing Managers 1321.0100 Manager, Electricity 1222.40 1321.0200 Terminal Manager 1222.45 1321.0300 Manager, Gas 1222.50 1321.0400 Manager, Water Supply 1222.60 1321.0500 Manager, Food Processing Plant 1222.65 1321.0600 Manager, Manufacturing 1222.70 1321.0700 General Manager, Electricity 1302.40 VOLUME I 40 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1321.0800 General Manager, Gas 1302.50 1321.0900 General Manager, Water Supply 1302.60 1321.1000 General Manager, Manufacturing 1302.70 1321.9900 Manufacturing Managers, Other 1302.90

Entry_145: Family 1322 Mining Managers 1322.0100 Manager, Mine 1222.10 1322.0200 Manager, Quarry 1222.20 1322.0300 Manager, Well Drilling 1222.30 1322.0400 General Manager, Mine 1302.10 1322.0500 General Manager, Quarry 1302.20 1322.0600 General Manager, Well Drilling 1302.30 1322.9900 Mining Managers, Other 1222.90

Entry_146: Family 1323 Construction Managers 1323.0100 Manager, Construction/Manager Construction 1223.10

Entry_147: Projects 1323.0200 Manager, Land Survey 1223.20 1323.0300 General Manager, Construction/General 1303.10

Entry_148: Manager Construction Projects 1323.9900 Construction Managers, Other 1303.90

Entry_149: Family 1324 Supply, Distribution and Related Managers 1324.0100 Manager, Material Control/Manager Materials 1235.10 1324.0101 Manager Supplier Quality 1324.0102 Material Co-Ordination Manager VOLUME I 41 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1324.0103 Manager Vendor Development 1324.0200 Manager, Transport 1226.10 1324.0300 Station Master, Roadways 1226.15 1324.0400 Traffic Inspector, Motor Transport 1226.17 1324.0500 Manager, Traffic 1226.20 1324.0600 Traffic Inspector, Railway 1226.25 1324.0700 Traffic Inspector, Tram 1226.29 1324.0800 Manager, Flight Operation 1226.30 1324.0900 Aerodrome Officer 1226.35 1324.1000 Flight Operation Officer, Air Service 1226.37 1324.1100 Traffic Officer, Air Service/Traffic Controller 1226.39 1324.1200 Manager, Storage and Warehousing 1226.50 1324.1201 Warehouse Supervisor 1324.1300 Goods Supervisor, Railway 1226.52 1324.1400 Goods Supervisor, Road Transport 1226.54 1324.1500 Station Master, Railway 1226.60 1324.1600 Platform Inspector, Railway 1226.62 1324.1700 Rates Inspector, Railway 1226.64 1324.1800 Depot Starter, Tram 1226.65 1324.1900 Section Controller, Railway 1226.67 1324.2000 Accident Officer, Tram 1226.69 1324.2100 General Manager, Transport 1306.10 VOLUME I 42 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 1324.2200 General Manager, Storage and Warehousing 1306.30 1324.9900 Supply, Distribution and Related Managers and 1226.90

Entry_150: Group 133 Information and Communications Technology

Entry_151: Family 1330 Information and Communication Technology

Entry_152: Services 1330.0100 Manager, Communication 1226.40 1330.0101 Communication Analyst 1330.0200 Contract Officer, Telephone/Liaising Officer/ 1226.70 PRO/Business Executive 1330.0300 Post Master 1226.80 1330.0600 General Manager, Communication 1306.20 1330.0701 Cluster Manager 1330.9900 Information and Communication Technology

Entry_153: Family 1345 Education Managers 1345.0100 Headmaster 1229.20

Entry_154: Family 1346 Financial and Insurance Service Branch VOLUME I 43 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Entry_155: Managers 1346.0100 Manager, Bank 1227.10 1346.0200 Manager, Insurance 1227.20 1346.9900 Financial and Insurance Service Branch 1227.90

Entry_156: Family 1349 Professional Services Managers Not Elsewhere

Entry_157: Sub- 14 Hospitality, Retail and Other Services Managers

Entry_158: Family 1411 Hotel Managers 1411.0100 Manager, Lodging and Catering 1225.10

Entry_159: Services/Resident Manager 1411.0200 General Manager, Lodging and Catering Services 1305.10 1411.9900 Hotel Managers, Others 1225.90

Entry_160: Family 1412 Restaurant Managers 1412.0100 Manager, Fast Food Service 1225.20 1412.9900 Restaurant Managers, Other 1305.90

Entry_161: Family 1420 Retail and Wholesale Trade Managers 1420.0100 Manager, Wholesale Trade 1224.10 1420.0200 Manager, Retail Trade 1224.20 1420.0300 Manager, Export 1224.30 1420.0400 General Manager, Wholesale Trade/Senior 1304.10 VOLUME I 44 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Entry_162: Manager, Wholesale Trade 1420.0500 General Manager, Retail Trade, Senior Manager, 1304.20

Entry_163: Retail Trade 1420.9900 Retail and Wholesale Trade Managers, Other 1304.90

Entry_164: Managers 1431.0100 General Manager, Recreation and Entertainment 1309.10 1431.9900 Sports, Recreation and Cultural Centre Manager, 1309.90

Entry_165: Family 1439 Services Manager Not Elsewhere Classified

Entry_166: Family 2111 Physicists and Astronomers 2111.0100 Physicist, General 2111.10 2111.0200 Physicist, Mechanics 2111.15 2111.0300 Physicist, Heat 2111.20 2111.0400 Physicist, Light 2111.25 2111.0500 Physicist, Sound 2111.30 2111.0600 Physicist, Electricity and Magnetism 2111.35 2111.0700 Physicist, Electronics 2111.40 2111.0800 Physicist, Nuclear 2111.50 VOLUME I 45 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2111.0900 Astronomer 2111.60 2111.1000 Metrologist 2119.10 2111.1100 Material Scientist 2119.20 2111.9900 Physicists and Astronomers, Other 2111.90

Entry_167: Family 2112 Meteorologists 2112.0100 Meteorologist 2112.10 2112.9900 Meteorologists, Other 2112.90

Entry_168: Family 2113 Chemists 2113.0100 Chemist, General 2113.10 2113.0200 Chemist, Organic 2113.20 2113.0300 Chemist, Inorganic 2113.30 2113.0400 Chemist, Physical 2113.40 2113.0500 Chemist, Analytical 2113.50 2113.0600 Chemist, Industrial 2113.60 2113.0601 Quality Control Chemist 2113.0621 Lab Chemist – Finished Product Testing 2113.0622 Lab Chemist – Incoming Raw Material Testing 2113.0623 Lab Chemist – Compound Testing – Batch

Entry_169: Release 2113.0624 Lab Chemist – Cured Compound Testing 2113.0800 Chemist, Forensic Science 2113.80 2113.0901 Quality Assurance Chemist VOLUME I 46 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2113.9900 Chemists, Other 2113.90

Entry_170: Family 2114 Geologists and Geophysicists 2114.0100 Geologist 2114.10 2114.0200 Petrologists 2114.20 2114.0300 Palaeontologist 2114.30 2114.0400 Geophysicist 2114.40 2114.0500 Hydrologist 2114.50 2114.0600 Mineralogist 2114.60 2114.0700 Seismologist 2114.70 2114.0800 Oceanographer 2114.80 2114.1500 Geologist, Petroleum 2114.15 2114.5500 Hydrographer, Waterworks 2114.55 2114.9900 Geologists and Geophysicists, Other 2114.90

Entry_171: Group 212 Mathematicians, Actuaries and Statisticians

Entry_172: Family 2120 Mathematicians, Actuaries and Statisticians 2120.0100 Mathematician 2121.10 2120.0200 Actuary 2121.20 2120.0300 Statistician 2122.10 2120.0400 Statistician, Applied 2122.20 2120.0500 Operation Research Analyst 2122.30 2120.0501 Associate – Analytics 2120.9900 Mathematicians, Actuaries and Statisticians, 2122.90 VOLUME I 47 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Entry_173: Family 2131 Biologists, Botanists, Zoologists and Related

Entry_174: Professionals 2131.0100 Biologist, General 2211.10 2131.0200 Marine Biologist 2211.15 2131.0300 Cytologist 2211.20 2131.0400 Botanist, General 2211.35 2131.0500 Economic Botanist 2211.37 2131.0600 Plant Breeder 2211.40 2131.0700 Mycologist 2211.50 2131.0800 Algologist 2211.55 2131.0900 Zoologist, General 2211.60 2131.1000 Entomologist 2211.65 2131.1100 Parasitologist 2211.70 2131.1200 Bacteriologist 2211.85 2131.1300 Chemist, Biological 2212.10 2131.1400 Chemist, Food 2212.20 2131.1500 Plant Pathologist 2212.70 2131.1800 Plant Physiologist 2212.80 2131.9900 Biologists, Botanists, Zoologists and Related 2211.90

Entry_175: Family 2132 Farming, Forestry and Fisheries Advisors VOLUME I 48 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2132.0100 Agronomist 2213.10 2132.0200 Horticulturist 2213.20 2132.0300 Soil Scientist 2213.30 2132.0400 Soil Conservationist 2213.40 2132.0500 Silviculturist 2213.50 2132.0600 Wood Anatomist 2213.60 2132.0700 Dairy Scientist 2213.70 2132.0800 Poultry Scientist 2213.80 2132.0900 Pisciculturist 2211.80 2132.1000 Farm Overseer, Crop Production 3213.10 2132.9900 Agronomists and Related Professionals, Other 2213.90

Entry_176: Family 2133 Environmental Protection Professionals 2133.0100 Ecologist 2211.25 2133.0200 Environment Scientist (Including Health) 2211.27 2133.0300 Taxonomist 2211.30 2133.0400 Paleobotanist 2211.45

Entry_177: Family 2141 Industrial and Production Engineers 2141.0100 Works Inspector, Engineering/Inspection 2149.10

Entry_178: Engineer 2141.0200 Instrument Engineer/Instrumentation Engineer 2149.15 2141.0300 Industrial Engineer 2149.76 VOLUME I 49 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2141.0301 Industrial Engineer Executive 2141.0400 Packaging Engineer 2149.77 2141.0500 Planning Engineer 2149.78 2141.0501 Production Planning & Control Engineer 2141.0600 Methods Engineer 2149.80 2141.0800 Engineering Estimator/Estimation Engineer 2149.84 2141.0900 Agricultural Engineer 2149.18 2141.1000 Textile Technologist 2149.20 2141.1100 Nuclear Engineer 2149.23 2141.1200 Jute Technologist 2149.25 2141.1300 Fibre Technologist 2149.30 2141.1400 Spinning Master 2149.35 2141.1500 Weaving Master 2149.40 2141.1600 Dyeing and Bleaching Master (Textiles) 2149.45 2141.1700 Printing Master (Textile) 2149.50 2141.1800 Sugar Technologist 2149.55 2141.1900 Dairy Technologist 2149.57 2141.2000 Wood Technologist 2149.60 2141.2100 Leather Technologist 2149.65 2141.2200 Glass Technologist 2149.70 2141.2300 Ceramic Technologist 2149.72 2141.2400 Printing Technologist 2149.74 VOLUME I 50 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2141.2500 Safety Engineer 2149.85 2141.2600 Occupational Health and Safety Specialist 2149.86

Entry_179: Family 2142 Civil Engineers 2142.0100 Civil Engineer, General 2142.10 2142.0200 Civil Engineer, Building 2142.20 2142.0300 Civil Engineer, Structural 2142.30 2142.0301 Plumbing Site Engineer 2142.0400 Civil Engineer, Irrigation 2142.40 2142.0500 Hydraulic Engineer 2142.45 2142.0501 Fire Protection Systems Design Engineer 2142.0600 Civil Engineer, Highways and Roads 2142.50 2142.0700 Civil Engineer, Railways 2142.60 2142.0800 Airport Engineer 2142.65 2142.0900 Civil Engineer, Public Health 2142.70 2142.0901 Public Health System Design Engineer 2142.1000 Engineer, Waterworks 2142.72 2142.1001 Groundwater Engineer 2142.1002 Wastewater Systems Design 2142.9900 Civil Engineers, Other 2142.90

Entry_180: Family 2143 Environmental Engineers 2143.0100 Solar Energy System Designer 2149.05 2143.0200 Bio-Medical Engineer 2149.17 VOLUME I 51 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2143.0300 Radiation Protection Engineer 2149.22 2143.0400 Waste Management Engineer, Radioactive 2149.87

Entry_181: Material 2143.0500 Pollution Control Engineer 2149.88

Entry_182: Family 2144 Mechanical Engineers 2144.0100 Mechanical Engineer, General 2145.10 2144.0101 Process Design Engineer 2144.0102 Process Try-Out Engineer 2144.0103 Process Try-Out Technician 2144.0104 Process Validation Executive 2144.0105 Manager, Process Engineering 2144.0106 Manager – Product Lifecycle Management 2144.0200 Designer, Machine 2145.15 2144.0201 Designer - Mechanical 2144.0300 Tool Engineer 2145.20 2144.0301 Equipment Designer 2144.0401 Mechanical Engineer, Production 2145.25 2144.0402 Product Conceptualization Engineer 2144.0403 Production Engineer 2144.0500 Mechanical Engineer, Structural 2145.30 2144.0600 Mechanical Engineer, Maintenance 2145.35 2144.0601 Service Engineer – Breakdown Service VOLUME I 52 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2144.0700 Mechanical Engineer, Automobile 2145.40 2144.0701 Prototyping Engineer 2144.0800 Automobile Designer 2145.42 2144.0801 Product Design Manager 2144.0802 Modeller 2144.0803 Product Design Engineer 2144.0804 Prototyping Manager 2144.0900 Mechanical Engineer, Aeronautical 2145.45 2144.1000 Mechanical Engineer, Marine 2145.50 2144.1100 Architect, Naval 2145.55 2144.1200 Mechanical Engineer, Air-Conditioning 2145.60 2144.1301 Layout Engineer 2144.1302 Industrial Engineer (Workstation

Entry_183: Design) 2144.1401 Service Engineer – Installation 2144.1402 Service Engineer – Installation and

Entry_184: Commissioning 2144.9900 Mechanical Engineers, Other 2145.90

Entry_185: Family 2145 Chemical Engineers 2145.0100 Chemical Engineer, General 2146.10 2145.0200 Designer, Chemical Engineering 2146.20 2145.0300 Chemical Engineer, Paints and Varnish 2146.30 VOLUME I 53 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2145.0400 Chemical Engineer, Drugs and Acids 2146.35 2145.0500 Chemical Engineer, Petroleum 2146.40 2145.0600 Chemical Engineer, Fertilizers 2146.45 2145.0700 Chemical Engineer, Food 2146.50 2145.0800 Technologist, Food/Chemical Engineer 2146.55 2145.0900 Technologist, Fuel 2146.60 2145.1000 Oil Technologist 2146.62 2145.1100 Technologist, Paper 2146.68 2145.1200 Technologist, Alcohol 2146.70 2145.1300 Technologist, Rubber 2146.80 2145.1400 Technologist, Plastics 2146.85 2145.9900 Chemical Engineers and Technologists, Other 2146.90

Entry_186: Family 2146 Mining Engineers, Metallurgists and Related

Entry_187: Professionals 2146.0100 Mining Engineer, General 2147.10 2146.0200 Mining Engineer, Non-Metals 2147.20 2146.0300 Mining Engineer, Metal 2147.25 2146.0400 Mining Engineer, Petroleum and Gas 2147.30 2146.0500 Metallurgist, Extractive 2147.40 2146.0501 Manager Heat Treatment/Metallurgist 2146.0600 Metallurgists, Adaptive 2147.50 2146.9900 Mining Engineers, Metallurgists and Related 2147.90

Entry_188: Professionals, Other VOLUME I 54 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Entry_189: Family 2149 Engineering Professionals Not Elsewhere

Entry_190: Classified 2149.0100 Engineers and Related Technologists, Other 2149.90

Entry_191: Family 2151 Electrical Engineers 2151.0100 Electrical Engineer, General 2143.10 2151.0200 Designer, Electrical Engineering 2143.20 2151.0201 Design Engineer 2151.0202 Electrical Design Developer 2151.0300 Electrical Engineer, Generation and Supply 2143.30 2151.0400 Illumination Engineer 2143.40 2151.0403 LED Light Design Engineer 2151.0404 LED Light Design Validation Engineer 2151.0601 System Analyst (PCB Design) 2151.0602 Systems Designer (PCB Design) 2151.0701 Design-For-Manufacture Engineer 2151.9900 Electrical Engineers, Other 2143.90

Entry_192: Family 2152 Electronics Engineers 2152.0200 Electronic Engineer 2144.60 2152.0301 Stress Analyst/Computer-Aided Test Executive 2144.65 2152.0400 Electro-Optical Engineer 2144.70 2152.0501 Design Engineer VOLUME I 55 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004 2152.0502 Design-For-Test Engineer 2152.0601 Quality Engineer 2152.0801 Electronic Hardware Design Engineer 2152.0901 Verification Engineer 2152.0902 Testing and Validation Engineer 2152.9900 Electronics Engineers, Other 2144.90

Entry_193: Family 2153 Telecommunication Engineers 2153.0100 Telecommunication Engineer, General 2144.10 2153.0101 Telecom Terminal Equipment Application

Entry_194: Developer (Android) 2153.0102 Telecom Terminal Equipment Application (Native

Entry_195: Applications) 2153.0200 Radio Engineer, Telecommunication 2144.20 2153.0300 Microwave Engineer, Telecommunication 2144.30 2153.0400 Line Communication Engineer, Tele- 2144.40

Entry_196: Engineer/Technician 2153.0500 Sound Engineer 2144.50 2153.0501 Sound Engineer, Media 2153.0511 Sound Designer 2153.0601 Core Engineer 2153.9900 Telecommunication Engineers, Other

Entry_197: Group 216 Architects, Planners, Surveyors and Designers VOLUME I 56 National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table NCO 2015 NCO 2004

Entry_198: Family 2161 Building Architects 2161.0100 Architect 2141.10 2161.9900 Building Architects, Other 2141.90

Entry_199: Family 2163 Product and Garment Designers 2163.0100 Package Designer/Packaging Designer 3471.80 2163.0201 Design Merchandiser 2163.0301 Hand Sketch Designer (Basic) 2163.0400 Furniture Designer 3471.20 2163.0500 Fashion Designer 3471.40 2163.0600 Textile Designer 3471.45

Entry_200: Family 2164 Town and Traffic Planners 2164.0100 Town Planner 2141.20 2164.0200 Traffic Planner 2141.30

