NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION
OF OCCUPATIONS-2015
(Occupational Description)
Vol II - B
Government of India
Ministry of Labour & Employment
Directorate General of Employment
www.ncs.gov.in
NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION
OF OCCUPATIONS-2015
(Occupational Description)
Vol II - B
Government of India
Ministry of Labour & Employment
Directorate General of Employment
www.ncs.gov.in
FOREWORD
National Classification of Occupation (NCO) plays a very vital role in maintaining
standards of occupation in the country and is regularly used in the network of employment
exchanges that constitute the Public Employment Service for Classification of Occupations,
job postings and job search. This classification is used in all types of censuses and sample
surveys conducted in India especially in data collection, processing, analysis and presentation
of survey results besides its wide range of applications in policy formulation and policy
analysis. The Directorate General of Employment, Ministry of Labour & Employment,
Government of India is responsible for maintaining and updating the National Classification
of Occupation in India aligned with the corresponding International Standard Classification of
Occupations (ISCO) of ILO. The first classification was NC0-1946 followed by NC0-1958, NC0-
1968, NC0-2004 and now the current series NC0-2015. The National Classification of
Occupations-2015 (NC0-2015) is aligned with International Standard Classification of
Occupations-2008 (ISC0-2008).
2. NCO is a classification of occupations which describes and assigns codes to the various
occupations in the country and aligns it with the ISCO. These codes are reviewed and updated
periodically to reflect developments in the labour market, particularly with the emergence of
new occupations, as well as to align with changes in the international standard. These codes
also help in promoting international comparability of statistical data relating to occupations.
These occupational standards follow a scientific and hierarchical approach having major,
minor and unit groups of classification which has evolved over the years to capture the
structural changes in the employment market and current work practices and work
environment.
3. The NC0-2015 is a compendium for occupational information available in the Indian
economy. The document gives an insight into the occupational framework, nature of duties
involved and the level of skill requirement to perform the activities in a real time work
situation. The users of NCO may make use of the information for vocational guidance, career
counselling and various surveys and studies undertaken by user agencies. The NC0-2015 has
also been mapped with the National Industrial Classification (NIC) and Qualification Packs
National Occupational Standards (QP-NOS) to cater to the structural changes in the labour
market. Furthermore, NC0-2015 framework is dynamic enough to capture and reflect the
newly emerging occupations in the industry.
4. The current volume of NCO details out the job description of 3600 civilian occupations
covering 52 sectors, as compared to the earlier series of NCO i.e. NC0-2004, which contained
the job descriptions for 2945 occupations. The NC0-2015 has 8 digit coding structure which
was mapped and aligned to ISC0-2008 with the addition of 2 digits. There is one to one
correspondence between ISC0-2008 and the NC0-2015 with the first digit representing the
Division (Major GroupL second digit representing Sub-Division (Sub-Major GroupL third digit
representing the Group (Minor Group) and the fourth digit representing the Family (Unit
GroupL a decimal is introduced after the first four digits in order to create a distinction
between the Families and individual Occupations. The NC0-2015 is in two Volumes viz. Vol I
& II (A& B) where Vol I gives the abstract of Occupations along with their concordance to the
earlier NC0-2004. Vol II gives the detailed descriptions ofthe occupations.
I
i
5. The Ministry is implementing the National Career Service (NCS) Project as a Mission
Mode Project for modernising and transforming the network of employment exchanges and
Model Career Centres are being set up in collaboration with States. The NCS Portal is
operational at www.ncs.gov.in and aims to link job seekers with employment opportunities
along with rich career content. The NCO Codes are integrally enmeshed in the NCS initiative
and facilitates efficient job matching. The NCO Codes may be used by varied stakeholders in
making information in the employment market more transparent and objective. Soft copies
of the publication is available on the NCS portal.
6. The NC0-2015 series has been evolved along with career content to contribute to the
knowledge repository of career options. More details on the classification, as well as the
principles, scope and structure of the classification are available on the National Career
Service (www.ncs.gov.in) platform. This knowledge repository provides career related
information for use by career counsellors and job aspirants across the country and aims at
supporting policy makers, students, job seekers, persons returning to the labour force,
investors and employers in making better labour market decisions.
7. I am confident that the publication will prove useful in classifying occupations for
official work, survey and research work, international comparisons on the demand and supply
of workforce and many more such areas. I place on record my appreciation for all the
stakeholders who have contributed their valuable inputs in the publication. I also take this
opportunity to extend my thanks to the members of the Expert Group on the career content
who have examined and vetted the contents of this publication/documents. I also extend my
thanks to the officers of the Directorate lead by Mr. Pravin Srivastava, Deputy Director
General (Employment) for timely coordination with all the stakeholders involved in this
initiative.
--~~Lj-
(P.P. Mitra)
Principal Labour & Employment Advisor
and Director General Employment
II
ii
J3.J1=J ~ x~ \J1 ~ II "l +-t ?II C'1 q
wFcffi
J3.{1=J ~
~ 3i!lc0<'1, ~o~o~o ~ ~-110001
~urm\
'+fRtl 'fl i( ¢I i( ~ "ff#rq Tele : 91-11-23 71 02 65
MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT
Fax : 91-11-23 35 56 79
SHANKAR AGGARWAL, I.A.S. SHRAM SHAKTI BHAVAN
E-mail :secy-labour@nic.in
Secretary to Govt. of India NEW DELHI-110001
D.O. No. D,GE-11/01/2016-VG/01
Dated: 1 7 J 5 f :L_o I f,
Subject: Release of the National Classification of Occupation (NCO), 2015 series.
Dear Secretary,
The Directorate General of Employment (DGE) is responsible for revising and
maintaining the National Classification of Occupations (NCO) on the lines of International
Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) of the ILO. The codes are used for classification
of occupations by the employment exchanges and census/survey organisations of the
Central and State government. These codes are revised from time to time to capture the
changes in occupational patterns and structural changes in the economy. The codes also
help in promoting International comparability of statistical data relating to occupations. The
first set of occupation standards (ISCO) was brought out by the International Labour
Organisation (ILO) in 1958 and revised from time to time, the latest being the 2008 series.
The corresponding series in the Indian National Classification of Occupation (NCO) were
1958, 1967 and 2004. These occupational standards follow a scientific and hierarchical
approach having major, minor and unit groups of classification which has evolved over the
years to capture the structural changes in the employment market. The NCO codes are
extensively used by the employment exchanges and other data/survey collection agencies
like the Ministry of Statistics & PI (NSSO, CSO), Census Commissioner & RGI, NITI Aayog,
IAMR, State Governments, Academic Institutions etc.
2. The current national series (NC0-2004) was based on the ISC0-1988 series and
required updation to capture information on the new occupations that have emerged,
especially on account of liberalisation and globalisation. In the meanwhile, the Ministry
began implementing the National Career Service as a Mission Mode Project for modernising
and transforming the network of employment exchanges and 100 Model Career Centres are
being set up in collaboration with States. The NCS Portal is operational at www.ncs.gov.in
and aims to link job seekers with employment opportunities along with rich career content.
III
iii
The NCO Codes are integrally enmeshed in the NCS initiative and facilitates efficient job
matching. The NCO - 2015 code is in 2 volumes, the first giving the abstract occupations
along with their concordance to the earlier NC0-2004 series and the second volume giving
the detailed occupational description. A hard copy of the first volume is enclosed for ready
reference. It is requested that the NCO Codes may be used by all stakeholders in making
information in the employment market more transparent and objective. Soft copies of these
publications are available on the attached CD and also on the NCS portal.
3. I request that information about the publication be circulated to the various
Departments and other users and its usage may be ensured by sending various statistical
returns using these revised codes. We look forward to suggestions for improvement in the
NCO codes and these may kindly be sent at feedback.dget@nic.in.
With regards
End: As above.
Yourssi~
-*~
(Shankar Aggarwal)
To,
All Secretary, GOI Ministries and Departments
(As per list attached)
IV
iv
~ ~) \J14 11 '( n;i=?lrr.lC "':TTT<Q
~~~
-;:ffl ~-11 0001
~ 3BtCll<1, 3l"nfo~o~o
Tele : 91-11-23 71 02 65
~ '<"l'<ctll'< cf; ~
MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT Fax : 91-11-23 35 56 79
SHANKAR AGGARWAL, I.A.S. SHRAM SHAKTI BHAVAN
E-mail :secy-labour@nic.in
Secretary to Govt. of India NEW DELHI-110001
D.O. No. DGE-11/01/2016-VG/01
Dated: t l / .>/ ;;ur.r-£
Subject: Release of the National Classification of Occupation (NCO), 2015 series.
Dear Chief Secretary,
The Directorate General of Employment (DGE) is responsible for revising and
maintaining the National Classification of Occupations (NCO) on the lines of International
Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) of the ILO. The codes are used for classification
of occupations by the employment exchanges and census/survey organisations of the
Central and State government. These codes are revised from time to time to capture the
changes in occupational patterns and structural changes in the economy. The codes also
help in promoting International comparability of statistical data relating to occupations. The
first set of occupation standards (ISCO) was brought out by the International Labour
Organisation (ILO) in 1958 and revised from time to time, the latest being the 2008 series.
The corresponding series in the Indian National Classification of Occupation (NCO) were
1958, 1967 and 2004. These occupational standards follow a scientific and hierarchical
approach having major, minor and unit groups of classification which has evolved over the
years to capture the structural changes in the employment market. The NCO codes are
extensively used by the employment exchanges and other data/survey collection agencies
like the Ministry of Statistics & PI (NSSO, CSO), Census Commissioner & RGI, NITI Aayog,
IAMR, State Governments, Academic Institutions etc.
2. The current national series (NC0-2004) was based on the ISC0-1988 series and
required updation to capture information on the new occupations that have emerged,
especially on account of liberalisation and globalisation. In the meanwhile, the Ministry
began implementing the National Career Service as a Mission Mode Project for modernising
and transforming the network of employment exchanges and 100 Model Career Centres are
being set up in collaboration with States. The NCS Portal is operational at www.ncs.gov.in
and aims to link job seekers with employment opportunities along with rich career content.
V
v
The NCO Codes are integrally enmeshed in the NCS initiative and facilitates efficient job
matching. The NCO - 2015 code is in 2 volumes, the first giving the abstract occupations
along with their concordance to the earlier NC0-2004 series and the second volume giving
the detailed occupational description. A hard copy of the first volume is enclosed for ready
reference. It is requested that the NCO Codes may be used by all stakeholders in making
information in the employment market more transparent and objective. Soft copies of these
publications are available on the attached CD and also on the NCS portal.
3. I request that information about the publication be circulated to the various
Departments and other users and its usage may be ensured by sending various statistical
returns using these revised codes. We look forward to suggestions for improvement in the
NCO codes and these may kindly be sent at feedback.dget@nic.in.
With regards
End: As above.
Yourssi~
~~
(Shankar Aggarwal)
To,
All Secretary, GOI Ministries and Departments
{As per list attached)
VI
vi
Table of Contents
VOL- II B
1. Division 6 1 - 40
2. Division 7 41 - 309
3. Division 8 310 - 530
4. Division 9 531 - 567
INDEX
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
Occupations in this Division are classified
into the following Sub Divisions:
Division
61 Market Oriented Skilled
6
Agricultural Workers
62 Market Oriented Skilled Forestry,
Fishery and Hunting Workers
Skilled Agricultural, Forestry and
63 Subsistence Farmers, Fishers,
Fishery Workers Hunters and Gatherers
Skilled agricultural, forestry and fishery Sub Division 61
workers grow and harvest field or tree
Market Oriented Skilled
and shrub crops, gather wild fruits and
Agricultural Workers
plants, breed, tend or hunt animals,
produce a variety of animal husbandry
Market-oriented skilled agricultural
products, cultivate, conserve and exploit
workers plan, organize and perform
forests, breed or catch fish and cultivate
farming operations to grow and harvest
or gather other forms of aquatic life in
field or tree and shrub crops and produce
order to provide food, shelter and income
a variety of animals and animal products
for themselves and their households.
for sale or delivery on a regular basis to
Tasks performed by skilled agricultural,
wholesale buyers, and marketing
forestry and fishery workers usually
organizations or at markets
include: preparing the soil; sowing,
Tasks performed by workers in this sub-
planting, spraying, fertilising and
major group usually include: preparing the
harvesting field crops; growing fruit and
soil; sowing, planting, spraying, fertilising
other tree and shrub crops; growing
and harvesting field crops, growing fruit
garden vegetables and horticultural
and other tree and shrub crops; growing
products; gathering wild fruits and plants;
garden vegetables and horticultural
breeding, raising, tending or hunting
products; raising, breeding and tending
animals mainly to obtain meat, milk, hair,
animals mainly to obtain meat, milk, hair,
fur, skin, sericulture, apiarian or other
fur, skin, sericulture, apiarian or other
products; cultivating, conserving and
products; storing and carrying out some
exploiting forests; breeding or catching
processing of t produce; selling their
fish; cultivating or gathering other forms
products to purchasers, marketing
of aquatic life; storing and carrying out
organizations or at markets. Supervision
some basic processing of their produce;
of other workers may be included.
selling their products to purchasers,
marketing organizations or at markets.
Supervision of other workers may be Occupations in this Sub Division are
included. classified into the following Groups:
611 Market Gardeners and Crop
Growers
612 Animal Producers
613 Mixed Crop and Animal Workers
VOLUME II B 1
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
Group 611 6111.0100
Market Gardeners and Crop Cultivator, General
Growers Cultivators, General; Farmer, General;
grows crops, vegetables, fruits, etc.
depending upon soil, irrigation facilities,
Market gardeners and crop growers plan,
market, etc., and sells produce.
organize and perform operations to grow
Determines crops to be grown depending
and harvest field crops, to grow fruit and
on nature of soil, climate, irrigation and
other tree and shrub crops, to grow
marketing facilities. Selects and purchases
garden vegetables and medicinal and
good seed, fertiliser, implements and
other plants, and to produce horticultural
other items of farm equipment including
and horticultural nurseries products, for
machinery. Clears field of stones, grass,
sale or delivery on a regular basis to
shrubs, trees etc., using hand tools.
wholesale buyers, marketing
Prepares plots by raising ‘bund’
organizations or at markets.
(earthwork) around them for retention of
water. Tills land using plough or tractor
Occupations in this Group are classified
and breads loads. Sows seeds and levels
into the following Families:
earth. Makes channels connecting land to
source of water for irrigation. Conducts
6111 Field Crop and Vegetable Growers
weeding and hoeing to conserve moisture.
6112 Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
Prepares manure by collecting and storing
6113 Gardeners, Horticultural and farmyard refuse into ditch and covering it
Nursery Growers with earth. Sprays insecticides, evolves
6114 Mixed Crop Growers measures to protect crops from
destruction by plant diseases and wild
6115 Medicinal and Aromatic Plant
animals and nurses growing crops by
Cultivators
picking wild growth. Harvests matured
6116 Agriculture Information
crops using sickle etc. Collects harvested
Management
crop into bundles and carries it to the
threshing ground when completely dried
Family 6111
by sun. Threshes harvested crop by
Field Crop and Vegetable Growers treading bullocks or machine. Separates
grain from straw by winnowing. Bags corn,
bundles straw and stores corn in godown.
Field crop and vegetable growers plan,
Sells produce in market. Hires labourers
organize and perform farming operations
when necessary and supervises their
to grow and harvest various types of field
work. Maintains equipment, building,
crop such as wheat and other cereals, rice,
fences etc. in good order. May operate
beetroot, sugar-cane, ground-nuts,
tractor, winnowing, threshing and other
tobacco, reed or other field crops and
machines. May breed animals. May do
potatoes, cabbages or other field
share cropping or take land on lease for
vegetables, for sale or delivery on a
cultivation.
regular basis to wholesale buyers,
marketing organizations or at markets.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6111
Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers
VOLUME II B 2
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
6111.0101 bushes to prevent destruction of crops by
Paddy Farmer animals and trespassing. Sprays
insecticides and evolves measures to
protect crop from plant diseases, insects
Paddy Farmer cultivates paddy as per the
and pests. Nurses growing crops by
package of practices recommended for a
careful watch and harvests matured crops
particular agronomic climate zone, type of
using sickle or other harvesting
soil, rainfall pattern and climatic
implements or machines. Collects and
conditions to achieve the yields as per the
preserves seeds. Collects harvested crop
genetic potential of a given variety and
into bundles and removes to threshing
sell the produce in the market.
floors. Dries harvested crop in sun.
Threshes crop and winnows to separate
Qualification Pack Details:
grain from chaff. Bags and transports yield
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0101
by carts for storage and sale in market.
QP NOS Name Paddy Farmer
Hires labourers if required and supervises
NSQF Level 4
their work. Prepares manure by collecting
and storing cow dung into ditch. Keeps
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
equipment, building, fences etc. in good
Code 6111
order. May operate tractor, winnowing,
Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers
threshing and other machines, May breed
animals.
6111.0200
Cultivator, Crop ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6111
Cultivator, Crop; Farmer, Crop grows field Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers
crops of wheat, paddy, cotton, sugar cane
etc., according to type of land and 6111.0201
irrigation facilities available. Determines
Wheat Cultivator
type of crop to be grown according to
nature of soil, climatic conditions,
Wheat Cultivator cultivates wheat as per
irrigation and marketing facilities in that
the package of practices recommended
area. Selects and purchases seeds,
for a particular agro climate zone, type of
fertilises and other items of farm
soil, rainfall pattern and climatic condition
equipment including machinery. Clears
to achieve the yield as per the genetic
land of grass, stones etc. using spades and
potential of given variety and sell the
other tools. Divides farm into easy
produce as per the competitive market
portions (fields) and raises boundary
prices without distress sale.
round them for retention of water.
Ploughs land or breaks it by means of
Qualification Pack Details:
tractor or other implements to soften
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0102
earth and increase fertility. Connects land
QP NOS Name Wheat Cultivator
with source of water by digging channels
NSQF Level 4
for irrigation as required. Sows by
broadcasting seeds in field and levelling
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
up with wooden plough. Conducts
weeding and hoeing to conserve moisture. Code 6111
Fences farm using barbed wire or thorny Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers
VOLUME II B 3
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
6111.0301 6111.0501
Maize Cultivator Soya bean Cultivator
Maize Cultivator undertakes the Soya bean Cultivator undertakes the
cultivation of maize crop at the farm level. cultivation of oilseeds at the farm level.
The individual is also responsible for The individual is also responsible for
harvesting the maize crop. The maize harvesting the soya bean. The Soya bean
cultivator needs to adapt recommended Cultivator needs to adapt recommended
practices for a particular agro climate practices for a particular agronomic
zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern and climate zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern
climatic conditions to achieve the best and climatic conditions to achieve the
possible yield best possible yield
Qualification Pack Details: Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0103 QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0201
QP NOS Name Maize Cultivator QP NOS Name Soya bean
NSQF Level 4 Cultivator
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6111 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers Code 6111
Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers
6111.0401
Pulses Cultivator 6111.0601
Cotton Cultivator
Pulses Cultivator undertakes the
cultivation of pulses at the farm level. The Cotton Cultivator undertakes the
individual is also responsible for cultivation of cotton crop at the farm
harvesting the pulses. The pulses level. The individual is also responsible for
cultivator needs to adapt recommended harvesting the cotton crop. The Cotton
practices for a particular agro climate Cultivator needs to adapt recommended
zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern and practices for a particular agro climate
climatic conditions to achieve the best zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern and
possible yield climatic conditions to achieve the best
possible yield.
Qualification Pack Details: Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0104 QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0202
QP NOS Name Pulses Cultivator QP NOS Name Cotton Cultivator
NSQF Level 4 NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6111 Code 6111
Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers
VOLUME II B 4
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
6111.0701 and evolves measures to protect fruits
Sugarcane Cultivator from wild animals, etc. Checks maturity of
fruits and plucks ripe fruits by hand at
appropriate time. Develops different
Sugarcane Cultivator undertakes the
varieties of trees by grafting, budding, etc.
cultivation of sugarcane crop at the farm
Transports plants and fruits by carts or
level. The individual is also responsible for
automobile and sells them. Hires
harvesting the sugarcane crop. The
labourers when needed and supervises
Sugarcane Cultivator needs to adapt
their work. Keeps fences, building and
recommended practices for a particular
agricultural tools and implements in good
agro climatic zone, type of soil, rainfall
condition. May prepare seedbeds and
pattern and climatic conditions to achieve
raise seedlings for own use and for sale.
the best possible yield.
May specialize in cultivating any particular
type of fruit. May arrange preservation of
Qualification Pack Details:
fruits in cold storage. May specialize in
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0203
grafting or budding.
QP NOS Name Sugarcane
Cultivator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
NSQF Level 4
Code 6112
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6111
6111.0851
Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers
Coconut Grower
6111.0800
Coconut Grower cultivates coconut as per
Cultivator, Fruit
the package of practices recommended
for a particular agronomic climate zone,
Cultivator, Fruit: Farmer, Fruit grows
type of soil, rainfall pattern and climatic
varieties of nuts and fruits depending on
conditions to achieve the coconut yields
type of soil, climate, irrigational and
as per the genetic potential of a given
transport facilities. Determines type of
variety and sell the products as per the
nuts or fruits to be grown based on nature
competitive market prices without
of soil, climatic conditions and irrigational
distress sale.
facilities. Selects and purchases seeds,
seedlings, cutting, etc. fertilizer and
Qualification Pack Details:
agricultural equipment required for
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0503
cultivation. Prepares land for planting by
QP NOS Name Coconut Grower
ploughing, manuring, levelling, etc. Plants
NSQF Level 4
seedlings and cuttings or sow seeds and
irrigates fields. Arranges regular supply of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
water by digging channels to source of
water. Prepares manure for use in Code 6112
cultivation by storing farm yard refuse to Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
get converted into usable manure. Weeds
and hoes grass and prunes branches of 6111.0852
fruit plants by hand tools to facilitate Friends of Coconut Tree
better growth and yield. Sprays insecticide
VOLUME II B 5
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
Friends of Coconut Tree has to climb 6111.1001
coconut palms with the help of a climbing Mango Grower
machine. He has to identify
tender/mature nuts, harvest it and handle
Mango Grower cultivates mangoes as per
them with care and also clean the crown
the recommended practices for a given
of the coconut palms. He should be able
agro economic zone and achieve the
to identify the types of pests and diseases
expected yield. He is also responsible for
of coconut and apprise and help farmers
hygienic harvest and post-harvest of the
to adopt Integrated pests and disease
mango crop and ensuring sale of the
management practices. He will look into
same.
various aspects of coconut crop
Qualification Pack Details:
management and should be able to
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0402
apprise farmers regarding needed
QP NOS Name Mango Grower
improvement.
NSQF Level 4
Qualification Pack Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0504
Code 6112
QP NOS Name Friends of Coconut
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
Tree
NSQF Level 3
6111.1101
Citrus Fruit Grower
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6112
Citrus Fruit Grower cultivates citrus fruit
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
as per the package of practices
recommended for a particular agronomic
6111.0901
climate zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern
Banana Farmer
and climatic condition to achieve the yield
as per the genetic potential of given
Banana Farmer cultivates banana as per
variety and sell the produce as per the
the package of practices recommended
competitive market prices without
for a particular agronomic climate zone,
distress sale.
type of soil, rainfall pattern and climatic
condition to achieve the yield as per the
Qualification Pack Details:
genetic potential of given variety and sell
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0403
the produce as per the competitive
QP NOS Name Citrus Fruit Grower
market prices without distress sale.
NSQF Level 4
Qualification Pack Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0201
Code 6112
QP NOS Name Banana Farmer
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
NSQF Level 4
6111.1200
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Viniculturist
Code 6112
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
VOLUME II B 6
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
Viniculturist; Grape Cultivator cultivates conserve moisture. Harvests matured
grapes for commercial use. Determines vegetables by cutting with knife or pulling
varieties of grapes to be grown, according or digging out from ground using hand
to soil, weather and market conditions. tools. Transports vegetables to market
Selects and purchases vine stock, fertilizer place for sale. Hires labourers on
and farm machinery. Hires workers to cultivation if required and supervises their
prepare soil, layout new plantings and work. Keeps buildings, fences and other
train young stock. Operates farm agricultural equipment in good repairs.
machinery and directs workers to apply Collects farmyard refuse to convert it into
fertilizer and pesticides to crop. Decides manure. May operate tractor for
when and how to bud, graft, prune, preparing fields. May arrange to keep
cultivate, and harvest crop. Arranges with vegetables in cold storage. May specialize
buyers for sale of crop. in growing any particular kind of
vegetable like peas, potatoes, etc.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6112 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers Code 6111
Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers
6111.1300
Cultivator, Vegetables 6111.1401
Bulb Crop Cultivator
Cultivator, Vegetables; Farmer,
Vegetables grows variety of vegetables Bulb Crop Cultivates bulb crops as per the
according to soil, season and demand. package of practices recommended for a
Determines vegetables to be grown taking particular agronomic climate zone, type of
into consideration nature of soil, irrigation soil, rainfall pattern and climatic condition
facilities, climatic conditions, consumption to achieve the yield as per the genetic
and market values. Selects and purchases potential of given variety and sell the
seed, fertilisers and other items of farm produce as per the competitive market
equipment including machines. Ploughs prices without distress sale.
land adopting indigenous methods or
breaks land by tractor. Divides land into Qualification Pack Details:
small plots by raising small bunds QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0501
(earthwork) around for retention of water QP NOS Name Bulb Crop Cultivator
and manure. Clears land by removing NSQF Level 4
grass, stones, etc. by hand. Mixes manure
with soil, sows seeds by spreading over ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ground and levelling or plant cutting and
Code 6111
irrigates field as required, by digging out
Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers
drains and connecting them to source of
water. Fences farm if required with
6111.1501
barbed wire or thorny bushes for
Solanaceous Crop Cultivator
protection. Spray insecticides and takes
other protective measures against plant
Solanaceous Crop Cultivator Cultivates
diseases and destruction by wild animals,
solanaceous crop as per the package of
pests etc. Hoes and weeds fields to
practices recommended for a particular
VOLUME II B 7
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
agronomic climate zone, type of soil, type of soil, rainfall pattern and climatic
rainfall pattern and climatic condition to condition to achieve the yield as per the
achieve the yield as per the genetic genetic potential of given variety and sell
potential of given variety and sell the the produce as per the competitive
produce as per the competitive market market prices without distress sale.
prices without distress sale.
Qualification Pack Details:
Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0901
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0502 QP NOS Name Chillies Cultivator
QP NOS Name Solanaceous Crop NSQF Level 4
Cultivator
NSQF Level 4 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6111
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers
Code 6111
Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers 6111.1901
Coriander Cultivator
6111.1601
Tuber Crop Cultivator Coriander Cultivator cultivates coriander
as per the package of practices
Tuber Crop Cultivator cultivates tuber recommended for a particular agronomic
crop as per the package of practices climate zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern
recommended for a particular agronomic and climatic condition to achieve the yield
climate zone, type of soil, rainfall pattern as per the genetic potential of given
and climatic condition to achieve the yield variety and sell the produce as per the
as per the genetic potential of given competitive market prices without
variety and sell the produce as per the distress sale.
competitive market prices without
distress sale.
Qualification Pack Details:
Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0902
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0503 QP NOS Name Coriander Cultivator
QP NOS Name Tuber Crop NSQF Level 4
Cultivator
NSQF Level 4 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6111
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers
Code 6111
Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers 6111.2000
Field Man, Agriculture
6111.1801
Chillies Cultivator Field Man, Agriculture; Mate Agriculture
distributes and controls labour of
Chillies Cultivator cultivates chillies as per Agricultural or Horticulture farm and
the package of practices recommended supervises ploughing, sowing, harvesting,
for a particular agronomic climate zone, etc. under directions of superiors. Checks
VOLUME II B 8
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
attendance of labour. Allots work to each bushes, grape vines, berry-bearing
worker. Collects seeds, fertilisers and bushes, cocoa trees and rubber trees and
equipment from stores and distributes to collect sap, for sale or delivery on a
them to workers. Controls workers regular basis to wholesale buyers,
engaged in ploughing, manuring, sowing, marketing organizations or at markets.
irrigating, gap filling, harvesting, weeding,
threshing, winnowing etc. Collects from 6112.0100
workers at close of day all implements Pruner, Tea Gardens
distributed to them in morning and
deposits them in stores. Reports progress
Pruner, Tea Gardens prunes branches of
of work to superior and arranges payment
tea plants to produce better yield.
of wages by superior. Attends to any
Observes plant and decides extent of
other job assigned by superior.
pruning needed. Cuts branches using
pruning knife at desired point and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
disposes them off by spreading at bottom
Code 6111 of plant or by removal. May prepare land
Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers for planting tea plants. May spray
insecticides. May perform low skilled
6111.9900 manufacturing tasks in factory during
Field Crop and Vegetable Growers, heavy harvest months.
Other
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Field Crop and Vegetable Growers, other Code 6112
include those who plan and carry out the Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
necessary operations to grow and harvest
various types of field crops such as wheat 6112.0200
and other cereals, rice, beetroot, sugar- Tapper, Palm Juice
cane, ground-nuts, tobacco, reeds or
other field crops and potatoes, cabbages Tapper, Palm Juice makes cuts in trunks of
or other field vegetables, for sale or palm-trees and gathers oozed out sap
delivery on a regular basis to wholesale (palm juice). Climbs palm-tree with pot
buyers, marketing organizations or at and knife tied with his waist through belt.
markets not elsewhere classified. Cleans space at top of tree-trunk
preparatory to tapping. Cuts narrow ‘V’
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: shaped opening in tree-trunk at specified
Code 6111 spot with knife to permit flow of sap.
Title Field Crop and Vegetable Growers Fastens pot on tree trunk with rope and
ensures that palm-juice drops into pot.
Family 6112 Adjusts pot, if necessary, to avoid waste.
Empties full pot into bucket next day and
re-fixes empty pot at adjacent place on
Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
tree trunk for further collection. Repeats
process for collection of juice from other
Tree and shrub crop growers plan
trees.
organize and perform farming operations
to grow and harvest trees and shrubs,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
such as fruit and nut trees, tea and coffee
VOLUME II B 9
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
Code 6112 latex. Fastens spout and cup below lowest
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers end of cut to collect oozed out latex. Adds
preservatives or anticoagulants into cup
6112.0201 where specified. Repeats process on other
Neera Technician trees under his charge and empties cups
when full or when oozing stops, into
Neera Technician has to manually climb
bucket. Scraps coagulated latex from scars
coconut palms. He has to identify the
on trees before making fresh cutting.
inflorescence and prepare it for tapping
Ensures that cups and spouts are clean
by beating it with right force and rhythm.
and tapping cuts are of uniform length
He performs this twice in a day for two
and depth, without causing injury to tree-
weeks. He has to cut the tip of the
trunk. Repeats process on tapped trees
inflorescence, wrap it up, apply clay and
next morning. May sharpen tapping knife
place a can for Neera to flow into it. He
and carry latex to reception station for
has to perform this activity twice a day.
weighment and further processing.
He has to store this Neera under suitable
temperature and hygienic environment, in
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
order to prevent any microbial
contamination. He should be able to Code 6112
handle freshly harvested Neera, have Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
knowledge about transportation for Neera
to processing centres and primary 6112.0400
processing of Neers and Neera based Budder
products. They also clean the crown of the
coconut palms. He should be able to Budder buds field-grown rose plants with
identify the types of pests and disease hybrid buds during rose-growing season:
management practices. He will look into Crouches over rows of rose plants to
various aspects of coconut crop reach plant rootstock. Cuts T-shaped
management and should be able to incision on rootstock and opens incision,
apprise farmers regarding needed using budding knife. Slices hybrid bud
improvement. from scion wood and inserts bud into
incision. Observes tying of buds to ensure
Qualification Pack Details: quality of tie. Repeats procedure, rapidly,
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0505 throughout work period to maintain
QP NOS Name Neera Technician production.
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 6112
Code 6112 Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
6112.0501
6112.0300 Tea Plantation Worker
Tapper, Rubber
Tea Plantation Worker is responsible for
Tapper, Rubber cuts channel grooves on carrying out the ground level activities in a
trunk of rubber trees at prescribed angle tea plantation right from nursery
on specified area and gathers excluded preparation to harvesting and storage.
VOLUME II B 10
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
Qualification Pack Details: Code 6112
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0204 Title Tree and Shrub Crop Grower
QP NOS Name Tea Plantation
Worker 6112.0801
NSQF Level 2 Rubber Nursery Worker-Budder
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Rubber Nursery Worker-Budder carries
Code 6112 out all the labour oriented nursery
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Grower activities specialized in bud grafting work.
He is responsible for the timely
6112.0601 completion of bud grafting and all
Coffee Plantation Worker seasonal activities assigned to him
facilitating smooth running of the nursery
and production of quality planting
Coffee Plantation Worker is responsible
materials as envisaged by the organization
for carrying out the ground level activities
in a coffee plantation right from nursery
Qualification Pack Details:
preparation to harvesting and storage.
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q0935
Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Name Rubber Nursery
Worker-Budder
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0203
NSQF Level 4
QP NOS Name Coffee Plantation
Worker
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
NSQF Level 2
Code 6112
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Tree and Shrub Crop Grower
Code 6112
6112.0802
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Grower
Rubber Nursery Worker-General
6112.0701
Bamboo Grower Rubber Nursery Worker carries out all the
labour oriented nursery activities. He is
responsible for the timely completion of
Bamboo Grower is responsible for
all seasonal activities facilitating smooth
cultivating bamboo as per the
running of the nursery and production of
recommended practices for a given agro
quality planting materials as envisaged by
economic zone and achieve the expected
the organization.
yield. He is also responsible for hygienic
harvest and post-harvest of the bamboo
Qualification Pack Details:
and ensuring sale of the same.
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q0936
Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Name Rubber Nursery
Worker-General
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q1101
NSQF Level 4
QP NOS Name Bamboo Grower
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 6112
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Grower
VOLUME II B 11
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
6112.9900 crop and supervises plucking, tapping and
Tree and Shrub Crop Growers, threshing of leaves, etc. Ensures proper
maintenance and development of
Other
plantation estate. Supervises recruitment
and welfare of labour employed.
Tree and Shrub Crop Growers, other
Maintains records relating to cost of
include those who plan and carry out the
production, sale and other accounts. May
necessary operations to grow and harvest
conduct research and organize
trees and shrubs not elsewhere classified.
demonstration. May arrange preservation
of produce and partially process them
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
prior to marketing. Is designated as
Code 6112
Planter, Tea; Planter, Coffee; Planter,
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Grower
Cinchona; Planter, Cocoa; Planter, Rubber
according to type of crop grown.
Family 6113
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Gardeners, Horticultural and
Code 6113
Nursery Growers Title Gardeners, Horticultural and
Nursery Growers
Gardeners, horticultural and nursery
growers plan organize and perform 6113.0200
operations to cultivate and maintain Nurseryman
trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants in
parks and private gardens, and to produce Nurseryman; Mali, Nursery manages
saplings, bulbs and seeds, or grow nursery on own account, or on behalf of
vegetables and flowers by intensive employer to grow trees, plants, flowers,
cultivation techniques, for sale or delivery shrubs, creepers, seeds, bulbs etc. in open
on a regular basis to wholesale buyers, air or green houses for sale to customers.
marketing organizations or at markets. Decides kind and number of plants to be
grown and method of planting, cultivating
6113.0100 and treatment based on soil, climatic
Planter conditions, irrigation facilities etc. Selects
and purchases seeds, fertilizers,
Planter manages plantation on own insecticide. Equipment and machinery and
account to grow plantation crops such as other items. Plans preparation of beds
tea, coffee, rubber, etc. Arranges to and method of planting, depending on
procure seed according to type of crop type of plants to be grown. Prepares bed
such as tea, coffee, rubber, etc. by various processes such as breaking soil,
Determines kinds of crop to be grown. mixing fertilizers, etc. sows seeds, plants,
Gets land cleared and prepared for seedlings, cuttings or propagates plants by
growing crops by digging, ploughing, grafting, budding and other methods and
harrowing etc. Organizes and supervises makes water channels. Watches growth of
various farm operations, sowing, sapling, seedlings, grafts and plants. Hoes
manuring, weeding, spraying insecticide, and prunes excess growth and off-shoots
and protection of crop from destruction of plants, dusts and sprays pesticides and
by wild animals. Arranges harvesting of takes other measures to protect plants
VOLUME II B 12
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
from pets, wild animals, etc. Observes Qualification Pack Details:
development of plants. Develops methods QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0202
of grafting and budding./ Collects and QP NOS Name Gardener
preserves seeds for sale. Hires labour if NSQF Level 4
necessary and undertakes planting, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
weeding, pruning etc. as required.
Code 6113
Supervises their work and trains them.
Title Gardeners, Horticultural and
Maintains buildings and equipment in
Nursery Growers
good condition. Keeps records of cost and
production statement. Sells seedling,
6113.0400
seeds, bulbs etc. May specialize in
Groundsman
landscape planting.
Grounds man; Grounds Keeper prepares
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and keeps up recreation and sports
Code 6113
grounds in proper condition for various
Title Gardeners, Horticultural and
games. Grades and selects site. Supervises
Nursery Growers
breaking of soil, removal of weeds and
foreign matters and retains required type
6113.0301
of grass if necessary. Plans drainage,
Gardener, General
checks final preparation of soil bed, mixes
fertilizers with chemicals like sulphate of
Gardener, General; Mali General grows iron to improve growth and colour of turf
flowers, trees, shrubs, seedlings, and sows required type of grass seeds.
vegetables, etc. in public or private Lays turf for preparing different types of
gardens. Prepares soil and sows seeds, grounds and sports fields such as hockey,
plants, seedlings etc. Waters seed-beds tennis, cricket, football, golf, etc. Gives
and growing plants. Weeds and hoes necessary treatment to fields according to
garden and prunes hedges and bushes. type of ground and pitch required such as
Sprays and dusts pesticides and evolves turf wicket, matting wicket, golf course
other measures to protect plants from etc. Dresses turf with nitro-chalk,
diseases and wild animals. Prepares soil ammonium sulphate and other chemicals
and lays lawn. Waters mows and levels at regular intervals to prevent invasion of
lawns. Prepares paths and ensures their earth worms and diseases and adopts
proper up-keep. Collects and preserves measures against ruinous actions of
seeds for sowing. Supervises labourers rabbits, field mice etc. Top dresses turf by
engaged for assistance. Keeps implements moving grass cutting and rolling.
etc. in good working order. May maintain Investigates causes of bad lawns and takes
green house for display. May cultivate appropriate steps to renovate neglected
vegetables and fruit trees. May specialize lawns, fields and grounds. Measures and
in ornamental gardening. May work in marks playing grounds, tracks etc., with
nursery for improving variety of plants chalk line, sets up goal posts and performs
from seeds, cuttings, grafting or budding related tasks. Supervises work of men
and be designated as MALI, NURSERY. engaged in upkeep of fields May prepare
May sell plants, buy seeds, fertilizers, annual calendar to facilitate progress.
insecticides, etc. May pay wages to May trim hedges and maintain flowerbeds
labourers employed. and pathways.
VOLUME II B 13
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Floriculturist- (Protected
Code 6113 Cultivation)
Title Gardeners, Horticultural and
Nursery Growers Floriculturist- (Protected Cultivation)
performs the duties of a flower crop
6113.0501 cultivator in the green houses.
Green House Fitter
Qualification Pack Details:
Green House Fitter is responsible for the QP NOS Reference AGR/Q 0206
installation of greenhouse structure as per QP NOS Name Floriculturist-
the structural layout and bill material (Protected
prepared by the supplier which will meet Cultivation)
up the exact requirement for the crops to NSQF Level 4
be frown under.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Qualification Pack Details: Code 6113
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q 0302 Title Gardeners, Horticultural and
QP NOS Name Green House Fitter Nursery Growers
NSQF Level 4
6113.9900
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Nursery Workers and Gardeners,
Code 6113 Other
Title Gardeners, Horticultural
and Nursery Growers
Nursery Workers and Gardeners, other
include all other nursery workers and
6113.0601
gardeners engaged in growing flowers,
Floriculturist- (Open Cultivation) seeds, bulbs, vegetables etc., not
elsewhere classified.
Floriculturist- (Open Cultivation) performs
the duties of a flower crop cultivator in ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
the open field Code 6113
Title Gardeners, Horticultural and
Qualification Pack Details: Nursery Growers
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q 0205
QP NOS Name Floriculturist- (Open Family 6114
Cultivation)
Mixed Crop Growers
NSQF Level 4
Mixed crop growers plan organize and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
perform farming operations to grow and
Code 6113
harvest specific combinations of field
Title Gardeners, Horticultural and
crops, field vegetables, tree and shrub
Nursery Growers
crops, and garden, horticultural and
nursery products, for sale or delivery to
6113.0602
wholesale buyers, marketing
organizations or at markets.
VOLUME II B 14
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
6114.9900 profitability. The person is responsible for
Mixed Crop Growers, Other working with Research and Development
team in agriculture industries (including
seed, fertilizer, pesticides, and micro
Mixed Crop Growers, other include those
irrigation industries) to satisfy the farmer
who plan and carry out the necessary
needs. They understand and market the
operations to grow vegetables and
technology to be transferred to farmers
harvest specific combinations of field
by way of demonstrations and training.
crops, field vegetables, trees, shrub crops
They also co-ordinate and motivate the
and garden, horticultural and nursery
farmers to adapt to modern methods for
products not elsewhere classified.
good returns.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Qualification Pack Details:
Code 6114
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q7602
Title Mixed Crop Growers
QP NOS Name Agriculture
Extension Executive
Family 6115
NSQF Level 6
Medicinal and Aromatic Plant
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Cultivators
Code 6114
Title Mixed Crop Growers
Medicinal and aromatic plant growers
plan, organize and perform operations to
6116.0102
cultivate plants that are used in traditional
Agriculture Extension Service
medical practices such as Unani, Ayurveda
Provider
etc. and for cosmetic use.
Agriculture Extension Service Provider is
Family 6116
responsible for speedy transfer of
information and technology to farmers.
Agriculture Information
He reduces the time lag between
Management
generation of technology and its transfer
to the farmers for increasing production,
The agriculture information workers productivity and income from agriculture
enhance the farmers’ knowledge about and allied sectors on a sustained basis. An
crop techniques and help them to agriculture extension service provider
increase production by sharing the latest gives talks, guidance and actual
technical knowhow with the farmers. demonstrations on latest technologies
6116.0101 related to agriculture. He also works with
Agriculture Extension Executive other experts in agriculture to learn more
or even develop new methods that could
advance production.
Agriculture Extension Executive works
with R&D team to market and transfer the
technology, products, knowledge and Qualification Pack Details:
information to the farmers, acting as a QP NOS Reference AGR/Q7601
bridge between the company and farmers
increasing their productivity and
VOLUME II B 15
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
QP NOS Name Agriculture Occupations in this Group are classified
Extension Service into the following Families:
Provider
NSQF Level 4
6121 Livestock and Dairy Producers
6122 Poultry Producers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
6123 Apiarists and Sericulturists
Code 6114
6129 Animal Producers, Not Elsewhere
Title Mixed Crop Growers
Classified
6116.0112
Family 6121
Community Service Provider
Livestock and Dairy Producers
Community Service Provider (CSP)/VLE is
an individual selected from within a Livestock and dairy producers plan,
village/area to act as a touch point organize and perform farming operations
between the business and the customer to breed and raise domesticated animals
to run the CSC. A VLE educates villagers on (excluding poultry), such as cattle, sheep,
26 Types OF G2C services and scores of pigs, goats, horses and camels, for the
other services related to daily lives of rural production of meat, milk and other dairy
population. The VLE then sells products products, skins, and wool or for use as
and services offered by the corporate and working, sporting or recreational animals
the Government through CSC. for sale or delivery to wholesale buyers,
marketing organizations or at markets.
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q7603 6121.0100
QP NOS Name Community Service Farmer, Livestock
Provider
NSQF Level 3
Farmer, Livestock manages farm on own
account for raising and breeding different
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: kinds of livestock. Selects and purchases
Code 6114 animals, arranges sheds, stables etc. to
Title Mixed Crop Growers shelter animals from weather and gets
enclosures put up for their safety.
Group 612 Determines amount of basic feed required
Animal Producers to feed animals and stock fodder and
other feeding material through purchases.
Arranges grazing of livestock on available
Animal producers plan, organize and
pastures and ensures by constant watch
perform farming operations to breed and
that animals do not go astray or get lost.
raise domesticated animals, poultry,
Restrains them from drinking polluted
insects and non-domesticated animals for
water. Examines and treats animals for
the production of meat, dairy products,
minor injuries and infection. Arranges
honey, skins, textiles and other products
proper medical aid in serious cases. Trains
or for use as working, sporting or
to cultivate desirable habits in animals.
recreational animals, for sale or delivery
Selects and pairs pedigree animals for
to wholesale buyers, marketing
breeding. Gets animals bred by artificial
organizations or at markets.
VOLUME II B 16
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
insemination if necessary. Tends animals and protects and guards the young
during birth and protects and guards animals. Arranges proper and regular
young animals. Performs tasks connected cleaning of animals, sheds and
with milking. Markets milk, and animals surroundings. Treats animals for minor
for meat, breeding etc. Gets animals diseases and injuries and arranges proper
inoculated and vaccinated in time and medical aid in serious cases. Arranges
adopts preventive measures in case of cleaning and massaging of udder, milking
outbreak of epidemic. Keeps records of of animals in hygienic manner by hand or
feed consumed, milk and other items machine, preserving milk, transporting
produced and stock sold or purchased. milk to various dairies and customer or
Attends to all correspondence, accounts selecting and selling animals etc. as
and administration of farm. Ensures required. Records feed consumed and
proper cleaning of sheds and stable, milk and other products sold. Adopts
flaying of skins and hides of fallen animals, appropriate measures to quarantine
disposal of carcasses etc. as necessary. animals in case of epidemic. May get milk
May raise particular breeds of animal. pasteurised before sale. May grow and
May raise and exhibit show animals. May cultivate feed for animals. May raise and
grow and cultivate feed for animals. exhibit show animals. May brand animals
with identifying marks. May separate
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: cream from milk and prepare other milk
Code 6121 products like butter, ghee and cheese.
Title Livestock and Dairy Producers
Qualification Pack Details:
6121.0201 QP NOS Reference AGR/Q 0502
Farmer, Dairy/Dairy QP NOS Name Dairy Farmer/Entrepreneur
NSQF Level 4
Farmer/Entrepreneur
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Farmer, Dairy owns and breeds milk cattle
Code 6121
for production of milk, butter, ghee, etc.
Title Livestock and Dairy Producers
and arranges for their marketing. Selects
and buys cattle. Makes proper
6121.0300
arrangements for housing and feeding
them and gets them inoculated and Livestock Worker, General
vaccinated in time to prevent diseases.
Buys and stores feeding supplies. Livestock Worker, General performs any
Determines amount of basic feed required combination of following tasks to bed,
and prepared it by mixing oil cakes, feed, water, load and unload, weigh, mark
roughages and minerals (salt and lime) in and segregate livestock awaiting slaughter
desired quantity. Gives regulated diet to in ranch, sales or slaughter yard or in
animals. Arranges their grazing on transit. Drives livestock into pens, killing
available pastures. Ensures guarding of or loading trucks or railway waggons.
animals from wandering and being lost, Weighs animals separately or in truck lots
eating poisonous and harmful plants, and segregates them according to weight,
drinking polluted water and mating with age, colour, and physical condition. Tags,
stray animals. Selects and pairs animals paints or tattoos identifying marks on
for breeding. Tends animals during birth livestock to signify ownership or grade of
VOLUME II B 17
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
animal. Records weights and grades for Livestock Worker cleans pens, feeding,
each animal processed. Scatters bedding watering and taking care of livestock. May
material such as saw dust or straw in pens be designated as FURB EARING ANIMAL
and maintains supply of water in watering WORKER if engaged in looking after
tanks. Feeds livestock with hay, grain, or furbearing animals.
other prepared feed as required. Cleans ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
pens, using hose, fork, shovel or rake. May Code 6121
apply liniment or other remedies to Title Livestock and Dairy Producers
livestock when illness or injury is
detected. May be designated according to 6121.0601
task performed.
Dairy Farm Worker, General/Dairy
Worker
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6121
Dairy Farm Worker, General attends to
Title Livestock and Dairy Producers
dairy farm livestock of resident and non-
resident owner. Attends to herd of
6121.0400
feeding cows and buffaloes and aiding in
Herdsman
calving, dehorning and vaccination. Keeps,
barns, stalls, containers and dairy
Herdsman; Grazier takes cattle and other equipment in clean and sanitary
domestic animals out for grazing on own condition. Milks cows and buffaloes as
or employer’s behalf. Collects animals required by hand or by machine. May mix
every morning from different houses. and blend feed for farm livestock and
Takes them out to available pastures for keep dairy records such as feed
grazing in field. Keeps watch over them consumed, individual milk production,
from being lost or strayed. Guards them gestation periods of cows and buffaloes
from eating poisonous and harmful plants etc. May perform other tasks as directed.
or drinking polluted water and
indiscriminate mating with stray animals.
Identifies animals in heat and arranges for Qualification Pack Details:
pairing. Collects and counts them in
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q 0501
evening and drives them back to their
QP NOS Name Dairy Worker
respective places. Ties them at fixed
NSQF Level 2
places or hands them over to owners.
May render first aid and assist in treating
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
minor injuries of animals. May be
Code 6121
designated as SHEPHERD if engaged in
Title Livestock and Dairy Producers
grazing and herding sheep and goats.
6121.0700
Milker
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6121
Milker; Diary Attendant; Gowala milks,
Title Livestock and Dairy Producers
and cleans milk cattle, collects various
feeds mixes them and feeds animals
6121.0500
before milking. Regulates timing of
Livestock Workers/Other Livestock
milking. Cleans and disinfects buckets and
Workers
other containers used in milking in sun or
VOLUME II B 18
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
vacuum. Ties hind legs of animals and Stableman
washes hind quarter with chlorinated
water. Cleans udder with plain chlorinated Stableman, Syce grooms, feeds and looks
water and messages them by hand. after horses, camels, mules etc., in
Disinfects hand by washing with stables. Grooms animals by brushing,
chlorinated water. Adjusts buckets currying, washing them and trimming
between own legs below udder. Presses their manes and tails using hair and metal
udders alternatively with fingers to extract brushes, clippers and scissors. Waters
milk from them into bucket. Stimulates feeds and exercises animals. Sweeps out
flow of milk from udder by repeated stalls and spreads fresh straw. May treat
supply of feed. Repeats pressing of udders sick or injured animal according to his
to extract maximum milk. Carries bucket knowledge or may report their condition
containing milk to specified place of to Veterinarian and follow his medical
storing. Treats udder and other minor advice. May harness or saddle animals.
injuries by applying antiseptic powder, May repair and recondition harness. May
ointment, etc. May sell milk. May prepare train animals for riding or for pulling carts,
ghee, butter and cream. tongas, etc. May take animals out for
grazing.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6121 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Livestock and Dairy Producers Code 6121
Title Livestock and Dairy Producers
6121.0800
Milker, Machine 6121.1100
Elephant Keeper
Milker; Machine; Milking Machine
Operator tends machine to milk dairy Elephant Keeper tends and looks after
cows and buffaloes. Guides cows and feeding, washing and exercising of tame
buffaloes into stanchion and cleans teats elephants and supervises general
and their udder with disinfectant. cleanliness of their stables. Tethers
Squeezes teats to collect sample of milk in elephants to ground anchor with chains,
strainer cup and examines sample for curd fastened round front and hind legs. Leads
and blood. Starts milking machine and elephants to watering places and scrubs
attaches cups of machine to teats of cows their hide to remove dirt, ticks and
and buffaloes. Removes cups when parasites. Inspects them for sickness or
required amount of milk is obtained. Dips injuries and reports uneasiness or
cups of machine into disinfectant solution ailments to Mahout or Veterinarian.
after each animal is milked. Empties milk Treats elephants as directed by them.
receptacles and cleans and sterilizes Gathers fodder and feeds animals with
equipment. masalas (Special food mixture). Files foot
nails and sweeps refuse from stables.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Straps howdah (riding arrangement) on its
Code 6121 back and prepares elephant for ride, when
Title Livestock and Dairy Producers desired. May polish and maintain
‘howdahs’ and paint forehead and trunk
6121.1000 of elephant with attractive design on
VOLUME II B 19
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
ceremonial occasions. May act as guide 6121.1400
and answer queries of visitors. May cut off Grass Cutter
excessive growth of tusk by sawing under
guidance of Mahout. May assist in training
Grass Cutter cuts grass from fields and
wild elephants and tending young calves.
gardens with sickle or other grass cutting
May ride elephants in absence of Mahout.
implements, for feeding cattle or other
animals. Mixes different varieties of grass
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to make feed palatable to animals. Carries
Code 6121 grass to stable or to market for sale. Keeps
Title Livestock and Dairy Producers tools sharp. May feed grass to animals.
May cut hay and other fodder into small
6121.1200 pieces with hand or mechanically
Shearer, Sheep operated chopper.
Shearer, Sheep collects sheep at shearing ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
yard. Shears wool closely from sheep, Code 6121
clipping carefully to avoid cutting or Title Livestock and Dairy Producers
nicking its skin. Gathers black and white
wool in separate piles. Keeps clippers 6121.9900
sharpened. May deliver wool to storing Dairy and Livestock Producers,
yard.
Other
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Dairy and Livestock Producers, other
Code 6121
include those who plan and carry out the
Title Livestock and Dairy Producers
necessary operations to breed, raise and
tend livestock to be used as working,
6121.1300
sporting, or pet animals, as well as for
Shearer, Animal, Other/Shearer, meat, milk, hair, hides and other products
Other Animals for sale or delivery on a regular basis to
wholesale buyers, marketing
Shearer Animals cuts with scissors or organizations or at markets not elsewhere
clippers hair or bristles of its skin. Gathers classified.
black and white wool in horses, camels,
pigs and other animals, not elsewhere ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
classified. Ties and immobilises animal Code 6121
before clipping. Selects suitable clipping Title Livestock and Dairy Producers
instrument and closely clips hair or
bristles taking care not to cut or nick its Family 6122
skin. Maintains and sharpens tools. May
sort bristles according to size and quality.
Poultry Producers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Poultry producers plan, organize and
Code 6121
perform farming operations to breed and
Title Livestock and Dairy Producers
raise chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks and
other poultry to produce meat, eggs and
VOLUME II B 20
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
breeding stock for sale or delivery to particular type of poultry stock. May grow
wholesale buyers, marketing and cultivate feed.
organizations or at markets.
Qualification Pack Details:
6122.0101 QP NOS Reference AGR/Q4301
Farmer, Poultry/Broiler Farm QP NOS Name Broiler Farm
Supervisor
Supervisor
NSQF Level 5
Farmer, Poultry owns and manages
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
poultry farms to raise fowls, chicken,
Code 6122
ducks, etc. for eggs and table use, and
Title Poultry Producers
sells produce. Determines varieties of
poultry to be raised. Selects and buys
6122.0200
fertile eggs, incubators, feed, chicken,
ducks, etc. Constructs brooder houses for Farmer, Poultry Breeding
chickens and pan for adult birds. Provides
heating arrangements, as required by Farmer, Poultry Breeding raises purebred
different types of stock. Gets poultry area chickens or other fowls. Purchases stock
cleaned. Treats minor disease of birds and fowl according to egg production, size,
arranges medical aid in serious cases. Gets prizes won, or other reasons. Selects and
them vaccinated at proper ages. Isolates pairs birds for breeding or breeds them by
and treats or properly disposes of failing artificial insemination. Arranges with
birds and takes measures against spread buyers for sale of pedigreed eggs and
of epidemic. Determines amount of basic pedigreed chicks.
feed required, prepares it or gets it done
and feeds birds at prescribed hours. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Adopts measures to avoid feed waste, Code 6122
water contamination, protection from Title Poultry Producers
wild animals and thieving. Provides them
fresh water to drink, prevents them from 6122.0301
wandering and being lost and from eating
Poultry Farm Worker,
poisonous stuff or drinking polluted
General/Broiler Farm Worker
water. Rears young stock carefully.
Hatches eggs through natural process of
Poultry Farm Worker, General attends to
providing heat for specified period by
poultry stock to raise hens, chickens,
stock themselves and through incubators.
turkeys and other poultry for egg
Keeps record of breeding. Estimates cost
production and sale as meat. Feeds
on feed and other items of expenditure on
poultry, cleans cages, nests and brooder
poultry farm and fixes selling prices for
houses. Sprays poultry houses with
eggs of different grades and stock of
disinfectants and observes poultry for
different grades and stock of different
indications of diseases such as fowl pox,
ages and pedigree. Packs and prepares
bronchitis and coccidiosis. Places vaccines
stock of eggs for transportation. May
in drinking water, injects vaccines into
operate both kerosene and electrical
poultry or dusts air with vaccine powder
incubators. May raise and exhibit select
to vaccinate poultry against diseases.
stock. May specialize in breeding any
Maintains feed and production records.
VOLUME II B 21
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
May incubate fertile eggs. May kill and NSQF Level 5
dress poultry.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Qualification Pack Details: Code 6122
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q4302 Title Poultry Producers
QP NOS Name Broiler Farm
Worker
NSQF Level 3 6122.9900
Poultry Farm Workers, Other
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6122 Poultry Producers, Other include all other
Title Poultry Producers workers engaged in hatching eggs and
6122.0401 poultry farming operations, not elsewhere
Hatchery Operator/Hatchery In classified.
Charge
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Hatchery Operator; Hatchery Man Code 6122
operates incubators to hatch eggs. Sets Title Poultry Producers
and adjusts mechanism of incubators to
maintain required degree of temperature
at different stages of incubation. Marks Family 6123
ownership and dates of setting eggs. Sets
them on tray and places it into incubator. Apiarists and Sericulturists
Inserts and places nursery tray after filling
hot water into water channels provided in Apiarists and sericulturists plan, organize
it (nursery tray) for creating humidity. and perform operations to breed, raise
Adopts disinfection technique to avoid and tend insects such as honey bees,
contamination of hatchery. Turns eggs silkworms, and other species to produce
everyday in different positions for honey, beeswax, silk and other products
specified period. Removes newly born for sale or delivery to wholesale buyers,
chicks to Foster-mother (chamber marketing organizations or at markets.
containing two parts having one burning
lamp beneath to provide required extent
6123.0101
of heat). Keeps and maintains breeding
Bee-keeper
records. May operate electrical incubator
having automatic devices of controlling
Bee-Keeper rears honey bees for
temperature and turning eggs. May raise
production of honey, bee-wax, bee-
select poultry and sell quality eggs. May
venom, royal jelly, pollination of crops etc.
demonstrate operations of various types
Selects suitable place for rearing bee-
of hatchery plants to develop hatching of
colonies. Purchases complete beehive box
eggs. May suggest effective measures to
provided with frames for forming
employer for better results.
honeycombs. Purchases and affixes
foundation wax in half portion of each
Qualification Pack Details:
frame and places them in beehive boxes.
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q4401
Catches and induces bees into box and
QP NOS Name Hatchery In Charge
VOLUME II B 22
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
transfer bees from oversubscribed Rearer, Silk Worm rears silk worms to
beehives. Creates beehive colony raise cocoons for production of silk.
consisting of queen-bee, worker-bees and Selects and purchases eggs of silk worms
drones. Inspects hives to locate formation for hatching. Arranges equitable
of surplus queen-shells. Catches or conditions of temperature and humidity in
destroy surplus queen-shells. Remains rearing room. Spread eggs on cards in
vigilant to catch swarming queen and bees trays and incubates them in temperature
with help of swarming net and keeps controlled room. Transfers worms from
them in hives to start new colonies. egg cards on bed of tray by gently striking
Cleans hives and remove dirt. Detects and them with finely cut mulberry of castor
removes wax moth before it spreads into leaves. Cuts adequate supplies of selected
different combs. Feeds bees with sugar thin, medium and coarse mulberry or
solution when necessary. Keeps hives on castor leaves, as necessary into small
stools with their legs dipped in water pieces with knife and sprinkles them
bowls to prevent ants from attacking hive. evenly over worms for feeding. Repeats
Covers hives with wire nets for protection process of feeding for about one month.
against birds. Wears hand gloves and bee- Changes feed from thin to medium and
veil while at work to protect self against medium to coarse leaves as worms grow.
bee-stings. Watches flow of honey into Removes un-consumed leaves from tray.
upper chamber and frequently checks Observes development of worms and
process of sealing of frames. Removes periodically arranges their proper spacing
honey filled frames from upper chamber in tray. Watches process of shedding or
of beehive box and replaces fresh unfilled casting skin of which takes place four
ones periodically depending on flow of times in one month. Detects diseased
honey. Brushes bees surrounding comb worms and takes measures to remove and
and removes seal of comb using knife. destroy them quickly. Watches
Places cut comb into honey extractor. development and maturity of larva,
Presses extractor on honey filled comb to shaping into spinning cocoon round its
extract honey into its chambers. May body. Collects cocoons formed out of
apply crude method of extracting honey cross breed larva for production of silk
from beehives located on roof or tree by and allows larva of pure race to develop
keeping off bees with help of fire smoke, into moth for multiplying breed Grades.
gaining access to hive and opening comb May sell cocoons. May cultivate mulberry
with knife for extracting honey. or castor plants. May keep complete
record of laying and hatching of eggs. May
Qualification Pack Details: conduct research and demonstrate
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q4801 experiments. May develop high breed
QP NOS Name Bee-keeper worms. May rear tussor and muga silk
NSQF Level 3 worms outdoor.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Qualification Pack Details:
Code 6123
Title Apiarists and Sericulturists QP NOS Reference AGR/Q4701
QP NOS Name Sericulturist
6123.0201 NSQF Level 4
Rearer, Silkworm/Sericulturist
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6123
VOLUME II B 23
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
Title Apiarists and Sericulturists and removes their hides. Packs hides in
crates and transports them for processing,
6123.9900 treating and preservation. Arranges with
Apiarists and Sericulturists, Other buyers for sale of hides. May treat and
preserve hides at farm. May breed stock
animals and be designated according to
Apiarists and sericulturists, other include
type of animal breed or raised.
all other who plan and carry out the
necessary operations to breed, raise and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
tend insects, for sale or delivery of honey,
beeswax, silk cocoons, on a regular basis Code 6129
to wholesale buyers, marketing Title Animal Producers Not Elsewhere
organizations or at markets not elsewhere Classified
classified.
6129.0200
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Mixed Animal Producers
Code 6123
Title Apiarists and Sericulturists Mixed animal producers plan and carry
out the necessary operations to breed,
Family 6129 raise and tend different types of livestock,
such as cattle, sheep, pigs, goats and
Animal Producers, Not Elsewhere horses, as well as poultry, and to produce
apiarian and sericultural products, for sale
Classified
or delivery on a regular basis to wholesale
buyers, marketing organizations or at
This unit group covers market-oriented
markets.
animal producers not classified elsewhere
in the group 612, Animal producers. For
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
instance, the group includes those
Code 6121
engaged in breeding, raising and tending
Title Livestock and Dairy Producers
non-domesticated mammals, game and
other birds (except poultry), snails, snakes
6129.9900
and other reptiles, as well as various
insects and animals used for laboratory Animal Producers and Related
tests, for sale or delivery on a regular Workers, Other
basis to wholesale buyers, marketing
organizations, zoos and circuses, or at Market-Oriented Animal Producers and
markets. Related Workers, other include those
6129.0100 which involve looking after and training of
Farmer, Fur-Bearing Animals animals in animal reserves, stables, zoos,
circuses, research organizations, animal
Farmer, Fur-bearing Animal manages farm homes, and similar institutions not
to breed and raise fur-bearing animals for elsewhere classified.
their pelts. Buys or captures breeding
stock. Breeds and raises animals in ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
surroundings simulating their habitat. Code 6129
Feeds and waters animals and cleans their Title Animal Producers Not Elsewhere
pens and yards. Kills animals in their prime Classified
VOLUME II B 24
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
Group 613 titration tube, and labels it with
identifying data, such as date taken,
Mixed Crop and Animal Workers source, quality, and concentration, and
records similar data on file cards. Packs
container of semen in dry ice or liquid
Mixed crop and animal producers plan,
nitrogen for freezing and storage or
organize and perform farming operations
shipment. May inseminate cows
to grow and harvest field, tree and various
other crops, as well as to breed, raise and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
tend animals and to produce a variety of
animal husbandry products, for sale or Code 6130
delivery to wholesale buyers, marketing Title Mixed Crop and Animal Workers
organizations or at markets.
6130.0201
Occupations in this Group are classified Seed Grower/Quality Seed Grower
into the following Families:
Seed Grower propagates and grows
6130 Mixed Crop and Animal Workers horticultural-specialty products and crops,
such as seeds, bulbs, rootstocks, sod,
ornamental plants, and cut flowers: Plans
Family 6130 acreage utilisation and work schedules,
according to knowledge of crop culture,
Mixed Crop and Animal Workers
climate and market conditions, seed, bulb,
or rootstock availability, and employable
Mixed crop and animal producers plan,
work force and machinery. Attaches farm
organize and perform farming operations
implements, such as disk and fertiliser
to grow and harvest field, tree and various spreader, to tractor and drives tractor in
other crops, as well as to breed, raise and fields to till soil and plant and cultivate
tend animals and to produce a variety of crop. Inspects fields periodically to
ascertain nutrient deficiencies, detect
animal husbandry products, for sale or
insect, disease, and pest infestations, and
delivery to wholesale buyers, marketing
identify foreign-plant growth, and selects,
organizations or at markets.
purchases, and schedules materials, such
as fertilisers and herbicides, to ensure
6130.0100
quality control. Hires field workers;
Artificial Breeding Technician
assigns their duties according to
scheduled activities, such as planting,
Artificial-Breeding Technician collects and
irrigating, weeding, and harvesting; and
packages bull semen for artificial
oversees their activities. Maintains
insemination of cows: Attaches rubber
personnel and production records.
collecting sheath to genital organ of
Arranges with customers for sale of crop.
tethered bull, and stimulates animal's
May oversee activities, such as product
organ to excite ejaculation. Examines
cleaning, grading, and packaging. May
semen, using microscope, to determine
provide customer services, such as
density and motility of gametes, and
planning and building planters, walls, and
dilutes semen with prescribed diluents
patios, and planting and caring for
according to formulas. Transfers required
landscape and display arrangements. May
amount of semen to container, using
VOLUME II B 25
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
bud or graft scion stock on plantings to Mixed Crop and Animal Workers,
alter growth characteristics. May develop Other
new variations of species specialty to
produce crops with specialized market-
Market Oriented Crop and Animal
appeal. May cultivate out-of-season
Producers, other include those who plan
seedlings and crops, using greenhouse.
and carry out the necessary operations to
May cultivate cover crop, such as hay or
grow and harvest field, tree and various
rye, in rotation with horticultural specialty
other crops, as well as to breed, raise and
to rejuvenate soil. May drive and operate
tend animals and to produce a variety of
self-propelled harvesting machine. May
animal husbandry products, for sale or
lubricate, adjust, and make minor repairs
delivery on a regular basis to wholesale
on farm machinery and equipment.
buyers, marketing organizations or at
markets not elsewhere classified.
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q7101 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Name Quality Seed
Code 6112
Grower
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Grower
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6112
Sub Division 62
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
Market Oriented Skilled Forestry,
6130.0202
Fishery and Hunting Workers
Seed Processing Worker
Market-oriented skilled forestry, fishery
Seed Processing Worker cleans seeds of
and hunting workers plan, organize and
extraneous and undesirable materials,
perform operations to cultivate, conserve
takes samples for testing, dries seeds to
and exploit natural and plantation forests,
optimum moisture levels, treats, packages
breed and raise fish, harvest and catch
and stores them in appropriate manner
fish and hunt and trap animals, for sale or
for distribution
delivery on a regular basis to wholesale
buyers, marketing organizations or at
Qualification Pack Details:
markets.
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q7102
Tasks performed by workers in this sub-
QP NOS Name Seed Processing
major groups usually include: renting or
Worker
investing, equipment and machinery and
NSQF Level 3
purchasing supplies; planning and
undertaking forestry, aquaculture, fishery
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and hunting operations; maintaining
Code 6112 buildings, tanks, machinery, and other
Title Tree and Shrub Crop Grower equipment; delivering or marketing
products; supervising and training other
6130.9900 workers
VOLUME II B 26
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
Occupations in this Sub Division are from theft and poaching. Maintains
classified into the following Groups: records of timber felled for sale. Enquires
and reports occurrence of theft, fire,
621 Forestry and Related Workers illegal cultivation, etc. to higher
authorities. Supervises work of mazdoors
622 Fishery Workers, Hunters and
Trappers
engaged in forest work, maintains their
muster roll and arranges payment of their
wages. May estimate quality and volume
of wood available in his section. May
Group 621
collect grazing fees and compensation for
Forestry and Related Workers offences.
Forestry and related workers plan, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
organize and perform operations to Code 6210
cultivate, conserve and exploit natural and Title Forestry and Related Workers
plantation forests.
6210.0200
Occupations in this Group are classified Forest Guard
into the following Families:
6210 Forestry and Related Workers Forest Guard; Forest Beat Guard patrols
allotted beat in forest area for
Family 6210 preservation of forest and games.
Supervises preparation of nursery beds,
Forestry and Related Workers
sowing of seeds, and nursing of growing
plants. Patrols forests to detect fires,
Forestry and related workers plan,
eliminate fire hazards and theft of forest
organize and perform operations to
produce. Cuts climbers with bill-hook to
cultivate, conserve and exploit natural and
prevent damage to plants. Apprehends
plantation forests.
offenders of forest laws and reports to
superiors. Supervises work of mazdoors
6210.0100
engaged in forest work and maintenance
Forester of forest roads, paths and fire lines in his
beat. May estimate volume of timber and
Forester; Forest Range Assistant develops grade trees according to quality. Is
nurseries, raises plantations and designated as DEPOT GUARD if engaged at
supervises duties of Forest Guard and sale depot.
Forest Fire Watcher and assists Forest
Ranger in development of forest and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
exploitation of its produce. Raises Code 6210
nurseries of various plants required for Title Forestry and Related Workers
afforestation. Raises plantations from
replanted seedlings. Arranges for 6210.0300
weeding, marking and felling of trees
Forest Fire Watcher
within his block and issues transit and
other passes. Supervises fire-fighting
Forest Fire Watcher; Reserve Watcher
operations and protects forest produce
patrols specified forest area to detect,
VOLUME II B 27
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
prevent and control forest fires. Clears fire matured lac from infected trees using
lines in forest to localise fire within limited knife, allowing part of lac to remain fixed,
areas and keeps watch for outbreak of with trees for further growth of larvae.
fires. Summons local people and fights Stores collected lac in godown for further
forest fire by cleaning areas, digging processing.
trenches, spraying water, sand, etc.
Reports, occurrence of forest fire to ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Forest Guard or Forester as required. Code 6210
Clears trees of climbers with bill-hook and Title Forestry and Related Workers
keeps paths swept of leaves and twigs.
May extinguish fire by chemicals if 6210.0600
available.
Gatherer, Medicinal Herbs
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Gatherer, Medicinal Herbs collects leaves,
Code 6210
fruits, roots etc. of herbs or other plants
Title Forestry and Related Workers
for preparation of different kinds of
medicines. Visits gardens, forests and
6210.0400
jungles and collects samples of dried
Foresters and Related Workers fruits, leaves, seeds and roots of medicinal
plants. Cleans foreign matter from herbs
Foresters and Related Workers perform by washing them with water and gets
various miscellaneous tasks in them examined by Chemists, Hakim or
preservation of forests extension of forest Vaid. Collects green herbs and dries them
and include occupations such as those in sun for storage and supply.
relating to collecting, preparing and
storing of seeds; raising seedlings; ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
transplanting seedlings in afforestation Code 6210
area; protecting trees form insects, Title Forestry and Related Workers
diseases and animals; marking felled trees
etc. 6210.0700
Gatherer, Firewood
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6210
Gatherer, Firewood cuts and collects
Title Forestry and Related Workers
wood from forests or fields for sale in
market as fuel. Visits forest or fields and
6210.0500
picks pieces of dried wood from ground
Gatherer Lac and piles them in heaps. Pulls down dry
and weak branches of trees using small
Gatherer, Lac; Lac Cultivator infects host- axe, sickle or large knife. Cuts decayed
trees with lac insects and collects matured branches and trunks of trees using axe
lac from them by scrapping or clipping off and hand-saw. Digs out roots of fallen
lac-bearing sheets. Ties brood-lac to fresh trees using shovel and axe; Ties collected
host-trees with young shoots for wood into small faggots and carries them
transferring lac infection and allows larvae on head or transports them in cart to
to grow on trees for specified period to market for sale. May assist in cutting large
attain maturity. Scrapes and collects trunks of dry trees using saw and axe.
VOLUME II B 28
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Log Feller; Tree Feller cuts down tree
Code 6210 using axe, saw, etc. for timber and fire
Title Forestry and Related Workers wood. Inspects tree to determine mode of
felling such as cutting through stem,
6210.0800 digging out root from earth, etc. Climbs
tree and lops off branches, using axe, bill
Cane Cutter
hook, and hand saw. Cuts stem from
bottom using axe and saw. Determines
Cane Cutter cuts mature sugar cane in
direction to which tree should fall,
fields using broad bladed knife or sickle.
considering vacant ground, slope of land
Examines sugar cane plant by sight and by
inclination of stem etc. Fastens one end of
feel of hand to ascertain its maturity and
rope on top of stem and gets free end
required pliability. Cuts matured plant at
pulled by others while cutting at root.
base using sickle or knife and pulls off side
May dig up root from ground using spade.
leaves of cane stalk with hook and cuts its
May fell small trees by uprooting them.
unusable top portion with knife. Places
May fill and level space from where trees
cut stalks in piles for loading into carts.
are removed. May plant new tree.
May load cane in carts or carry stalk on
head for weighment.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6210
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Forestry and Related Workers
Code 6210
Title Forestry and Related Workers
6210.1100
Wood Cutter
6210.0900
Thatch Cutter
Wood Cutter cuts felled trees into logs of
required size. Trims branches of fallen
Thatch Cutter cuts straw or rushes in grass
tree using axe and handsaw. Cuts stem
land or forest for roofing of huts and
into beams, billets or logs of required size.
other uses. Cuts matured green straw
Separates usable timber from fuel wood
using sickle or scythe. Ties cut green straw
with axe and saw. May split remaining
into sheaves of convenient thickness and
portion of log to small sizes for fuel.
allows them to dry in sun and shuffles
stacks once or twice to allow green
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sheaves at bottom to get dried. Removes
Code 6210
by hand or through cart dried straw from
Title Forestry and Related Workers
field to safe place for storage. May cut
and collect fodder for cattle.
6210.1200
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Marker, Log
Code 6210
Title Forestry and Related Workers Marker, Log measures and determines
volume of timber in each log. Measures
6210.1000 girth, diameter and length of log using
tape to determine volume of log. Marks
Log Feller
VOLUME II B 29
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
length and diameter on log ends with ink, timber. Inspects enumerated trees to
coloured chalk or paint. grade them according to quality of timber
by making sample cuts. May identify type
of timber visually.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6210 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Forestry and Related Workers Code 6210
Title Forestry and Related Workers
6210.1300
Sandal Wood Extractor 6210.1500
Sorter, Timber
Sandal Wood Extractor extracts sandal
wood from sandal wood trees by felling Sorter, Timber sorts out and grades
trees and removing sap wood from trunks, timber according to quality of wood.
branches and roots using axe, adze and Examines cut timber and separates
saw. Cuts off thin branches and twigs from decayed or damaged wood for fuel.
tree trunk using axe or saw. Removes bark Grades selected timber according to
and sap wood of tree trunks, branches quality, maturity and size. May estimate
and roots carefully by chipping with adze volume of wood. May auction sale fuel
or bill hook ensuring not to cut through wood to retail or wholesale dealers.
heart wood. Cuts trunks, roots, branches
into billets of suitable length using hand ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
saw. Removes carefully layer of sap wood Code 6210
from billets using axe or hand adze Title Forestry and Related Workers
ensuring to protect heart wood from
being damaged or cut through. Delivers 6210.1600
finished sandal heart wood billets to
Log Driver
superior. Collects sandal wood dust from
floor and accounts for it separately.
Log Driver drives logs downstream from
logging sites to mills. Rolls logs from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
landing into river, using cant hook or stout
Code 6210
lever fitted with strong spike. Guides logs
Title Forestry and Related Workers
around obstruction and into current of
stream from bank, boat, or floating logs
6210.1400
using pike pole. Pulls or rolls key logs from
Estimator, Timber jams to release logs from obstruction
using stout lever with spike or pike pole.
Estimator, Timber; Enumerator, Timber May collect logs in booms or rafts to
estimates volume of standing timber in retain logs at mill.
enumerated trees by surveying forest,
examining and measuring sample trees, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
etc. Studies list of enumerated trees Code 6210
supplied by forest department. Visits Title Forestry and Related Workers
enumeration plots in forest and measures
length and girth of selected sample trees
to estimate cubic content of available
VOLUME II B 30
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
6210.1700 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Charcoal Burner, Wood Code 6210
Title Forestry and Related Workers
Charcoal Burner, Wood operates kiln at
wood felling site to convert wood into 6210.1900
required quality and type of charcoal by Distiller, Turpentine and Eucalyptus
slow burning process. Stacks wood in
convenient sizes in kiln. Places kindling in Distiller, Turpentine and Eucalyptus;
kiln to start fire. Seals top of kiln when Distillery Operator operates still to refine
desired heat is reached with mud plaster. crude turpentine or eucalyptus oil
Observes colour of smoke as it emits obtained from wood or leaves. Operates
through draught holes in kiln bottom to manipulating valves and charges still with
determine proper burning of charcoal. crude turpentine or eucalyptus oil at
Regulates formation of charcoal by regulated rate of flow. Connects outlet
opening and closing draught holes as tubes of still to receiving jars or
required Smothers fire when charcoal has containers. Closes openings and inlets of
been formed by sealing cracks and still. Sees that cold water is circulating
draught holes with mud plaster. Removes inside condensing unit. Manipulates
charcoal with shovel when kiln cools steam injection valves to allow still to be
down. heated up to prescribed degree of
temperature. Checks meter reading and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: maintains heating at required
Code 6210 temperature for prescribed period. Allows
Title Forestry and Related Workers oil vapour to pass through coolers to get
condensed into oil and water. Observes oil
6210.1800 and water being collected in different
Digester Operator, Wood containers. Directs pumping of primary
bulk oil to overhead measuring tank for
further processing. Watches progress and
Digester Operator, Wood operates
manipulates valves at proper time during
digester to extract crude turpentine,
processing to extract oil from coils. May
quinine, catechu (Kachu), etc. from wood-
operate still to extract essential and other
chips or barks of specific species of trees
medicinal oils. May fill bottles with
by boiling them in water. Gets digester
distilled oil in prescribed quantities.
filled with wood chips or bark, chemicals
and water. Releases steam into digester.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Adjusts temperature and pressure at
specified level by manipulating steam Code 6210
valves. Cooks wood-chips or barks for Title Forestry and Related Workers
required time. Tests samples by titration
or standard colour test to determine 6210.2000
completion of cooking process. Drains Lac Treater
liquid from digester into drums for further
processing. May do minor repairs to Lac Treater; Lac Worker treats or
equipment. May operate simple devised processes raw lac by grinding, washing
wet plant. May operate wood chipper. and drying to make pure or seed lac for
making lac polish, varnish, sealing, wax,
VOLUME II B 31
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
etc. Washes raw lac in water and Fishery workers, hunters and trappers
chemicals to remove impurities, dead breed and raise fish, harvest and catch
insects and dye matter. Dries washed lac fish and hunt and trap animals, for sale or
(seed lac) in open. Dissolves seed lac in delivery on a regular basis to wholesale
spirit and linseed oil or in any one of them buyers, marketing organizations or at
in prescribed proportion. Filters solution markets.
through cloth bags or filters and collects
filtered liquid called lac varnish or polish Occupations in this Group are classified
in containers. Boils bag waste in water into the following Families:
with washing soda. Collects wax floating
on water and cools it to become lac wax. 6221 Aquaculture Workers
Makes powder of seed lac, rosin,
6222 Inland and Coastal Waters Fishery
chemicals and colour compound in
Workers
prescribed quantities. Heats mixture to
6223 Deep-Sea Fishery Workers
prescribed temperature. Adds turpentine
6224 Hunters and Trappers
to heated mixture or molten solution.
Pours molten composition into special
moulds with cooling arrangement.
Family 6221
Removes moulded sealing wax from
mould after specified period. Aquaculture Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Aquaculture workers breed and raise fish
Code 6210 and cultivate mussels, oysters and other
Title Forestry and Related Workers forms of aquatic life, for sale or delivery
on a regular basis to wholesale buyers,
6210.9900 marketing organizations or at markets.
Forestry and Related Workers,
Other 6221.0101
Shrimp Farmer
Loggers and Forestry Workers, Other
perform number of miscellaneous tasks in Shrimp Farmer purchases seeds from
forest and include workers not elsewhere hatcheries on deciding the type of species
classified such as those engaged in to harvest, constructs a pond and harvest
sawing, weeding, collecting felled trees, the shrimp by giving it a healthy feed and
transporting logs, repairing forest road, maintaining quality to sell in the market.
etc. and are usually known as FOREST
LABOURERS. Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q4902
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: QP NOS Name Shrimp
Code 6210 Farmer
Title Forestry and Related Workers NSQF Level 4
Group 622 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Fishery Workers, Hunters and Code 6221
Trappers Title Aquaculture Workers
6221.0102
VOLUME II B 32
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
Hatchery Production Worker nets, bag nets, long lines etc. in area to be
fished. Drags nets and gears and other
Hatchery Production Worker produces the equipment of boat. May salt fish for
post larval in hatcheries after producing preservation. May operate power driven
seed in reproduction and maturation boats. May repair boats. May catch fish
stage, which is then transferred to the with hook and line using bait or artificial
final grow-out stage for shrimp farming, lures.
considering labour and capital as major
factors ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6222
Qualification Pack Details: Title Inland and Coastal Water Fishery
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q4901 Workers
QP NOS Name Hatchery
Production Worker 6222.0200
NSQF Level 5 Fisherman, Estuaries, Coastal and
Back Water
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6221 Fisherman, Estuaries, Coastal and
Title Aquaculture Workers Backwater fishes in estuaries, coastal and
back waters using different types of nets
and gears according to nature of fish to be
Family 6222 caught and type of fishing area. Goes in
Inland and Coastal Waters Fishery boat, canoe or catamaran with fishing
Workers nets and gears. Lays either singly or with
other fishermen different types of fishing
nets and gears such as drag nets, stake
Inland and coastal waters fishery workers,
nets, basket traps, dip nets in coastal and
alone or as members of fishing-vessel
back waters. Pulls or drags net or gear to
crews, catch fish or gather other forms of
surface of water after some time to collect
aquatic life in inland or coastal waters, for
fish caught and puts catch in hold (storage
sale or delivery on a regular basis to
space) of boat. May stand on shore or
wholesale buyers, marketing
rock and pull net to shore to collect fish.
organizations or at markets.
May operate power driven boats. May
repair boats. May use torch and spear or
6222.0100
harpoon to catch fish (torch fishing).
Fisherman, Inland Water
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Fisherman, Inland Waters fishes in inland Code 6222
waters, rivers, tanks, channels, creeks etc. Title Inland and Coastal Water Fishery
using different types of nets and other Workers
fishing gears according to type of fish to
be caught. Goes singly or with other 6222.9900
fishermen in boats, dinghies or canoes
Inland and Coastal Water Fishery
with necessary equipment. Throws or
Workers, Other
fixes different types of fishing nets and
gears such as gill nets, cast nets, drag
VOLUME II B 33
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
Inland and Coastal Water Fishery Qualification Pack Details:
Workers, other include those who alone QP NOS Reference AGR/Q5001
or as members of fishing-vessel crews, QP NOS Name Marine Capture
catch fish or gather other forms of aquatic Fisherman
life in inland or coastal waters, for sale or NSQF Level 4
delivery, on a regular basis to wholesale ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
buyers, marketing organizations or at
Code 6223
markets not elsewhere classified.
Title Deep Sea Fishery Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
6223.9900
Code 6222
Deep Sea Fishery Workers, Other
Title Inland and Coastal Water Fishery
Workers
Deep-sea Fishery Workers, other include
all those who as members of fishing vessel
Family 6223
crews, catch deep-sea fish, for sale or
Deep-Sea Fishery Workers delivery, on a regular basis to wholesale
buyers, marketing organizations or at
Deep-sea fishery workers, as skippers or markets not elsewhere classified.
members of fishing vessel crews, catch
deep-sea fish, for sale or delivery to ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
wholesale buyers, marketing Code 6223
organizations or at markets. Title Deep Sea Fishery Workers
6223.0101 Family 6224
Fisherman, Deep Sea/Marine
Hunters and Trappers
Capture Fisherman
Hunters and trappers catch and kill
Fisherman, Deep Sea catches fish in deep
sea or in shore and off-shore waters using mammals, birds or reptiles mainly for
different types of fishing gears and nets meat, skin, feathers and other products.
depending on type of fish to be caught. They also catch animals and birds for
Sets sail in boat or canoe and goes with
treatment and tagging.
other fishermen long distances on sea.
Selects area to be fished and lays different 6224.0300
types of nets or fishing gears such as gill
Trapper
net drift net, drag net, hook and line with
bait or artificial lures, etc. Drags net or
Trappers catches birds or wild animals
hook and line to surface and collects fish
alive by means of traps, snares and nets
caught in it. Puts fish in hold (storage
for treatment and tagging. Selects
space) of boat. Repairs or mends nets as
location, sets bait and camouflages traps.
necessary and maintains fishing gears.
Removes captured animal.. May specialize
May salt and dry them for preservation.
in catching particular type of animal or
May sail in trawlers and operate power
birds. May prepare nets, cages and other
driven boats.
snares for trapping animals and birds.
VOLUME II B 34
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Hunters and Trappers
Code 6224
Title Hunters and Trappers 6224.0600
Fisheries Inspector
6224.0400
Tracker Fisheries Inspector; Fisheries Sub-
Inspector demonstrates, supervises and
Tracker; locates rest places and hide outs controls work of staff engaged in fish
of wild animals by finding their pug marks, collection, sale, curing and demonstration
kills, remain of meals etc. and following centres. Demonstrates to public proper
clues to track down their hide-outs. methods of fish culture and storing.
Observes foot prints and marks on Supervises sale of fish to public and
ground, water hole, grass, foliage, twigs, proper maintenance of fish curing yards.
remains of meals etc. and identifies Issues licences to Fishermen for fishing in
animals. Selects sites and erects machans State Waters(including back waters), use
(observation post) in trees for of china net, stake net, lime shell
observation. May be familiar with use of gathering etc. and conducts regular patrol
weapons such as fire arms, spears, knives, to prevent illicit fishing. Surveys area
etc. May locate wild animals to save them under jurisdiction for fish breeding,
from natural calamities. stocking, etc. and to assess potentiality of
water area. Executes development
schemes such as mechanisation of fishing
crafts, financial assistance to Fishermen,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: training of Fishermen etc. Guides
preparation of fish meal. Determines
Code 6224
chemical ingredients necessary for fish
Title Hunters and Trappers
culture in ponds, tanks, rivers etc. and
arranges for supply and transport of fish
6224.0500
seed and fingerlings to Fishermen and
Fish Overseer
other areas under proper conditions.
Performs other official duties such as
Fish Overseer; Fish Cultural Officer;
collection of revenue, sending reports for
Extension Officer, Fisheries; Sub-Overseer,
publication in gazette, etc. as necessary.
Fisheries maintains fish collection centres
May listen to grievances of Fishermen and
fish farms, etc. and advises people in
take necessary measures to remove them.
proper methods of fish culture. Looks
after fish collection centres, fish farms,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
etc. and ensures their proper
Code 6224
maintenance. Demonstrates correct
Title Hunters and Trappers
methods of fish farming, fish culture, etc.
to public to achieve improvements in
6224.0700
these fields. May assist Fisheries Inspector
Field Man, Fish
in transporting fish seed to different
fishery stations.
Field Man, Fish; Supervisor, Fish arranges
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: transport of fish to different places and
supplies, fish seed to purchasers for
Code 6224
VOLUME II B 35
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
growth in tanks, wells, rivers, etc. Breeds Pisciculturist. Collects fingerlings or fish
fish in special tanks or ponds and collects seed of different sizes and varieties and
fish seeds and fingerlings. Transports puts them in water in metal containers.
them to areas where required. Sells fish Transports containers to desired areas
caught in rivers, lakes, sea, etc. to public and releases fingerlings in public rivers,
and maintains necessary records. tanks, ponds, etc. Assists Pisciculturist in
experimental farms in transporting and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: releasing fish in water, feeding them etc.
Code 6224 May sell fish caught in public waters, if
Title Hunters and Trappers necessary.
6224.0800 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Yard Officer Code 6224
Title Hunters and Trappers
Yard Officer; Petty Yard Officer; Yard
6224.1000
Master; Yard Manager (Fish) guides and
ensures curing of fish according to Fish Curer
prescribed standards. Checks weight of
fish received for curing. Issues prescribed Fish Curer salts, cures and preserves fish
quantity of salt for curing and guides to prevent putrefaction and for use over
curing as necessary. Ensures that salted long periods. Washes fish with water and
fish are dried in sun in curing yards for cuts off head, fins, tail etc. as necessary.
prescribed period and that they are Opens out stomach with knife and
properly packed. Directs preparation of removes viscera, gills etc. to prevent
fish meal, etc. Maintains technical putrefaction. Applies salt to cleaned fish
laboratory and supervises working of its either one by one or in lot to preserve
staff. May collect fish statistics in his area. them. Stacks salted fish for required
period and shuffles them as necessary at
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: specified intervals. Takes fish out of stack
Code 6224 and washes them if necessary. Spreads
Title Hunters and Trappers fish in open on mats or bamboo to dry
them in sun. May pack fish for
6224.0900 transporting them to other areas. May dry
fish in sun with or without cleaning and
Fish Hatcher
salting particularly in case of seeds and
small fingerlings.
Fish Hatcher hatches fish in small tanks
and releases hatched fish or fingerlings
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
into public tanks, rivers, etc. for growth.
Code 6224
Observes habits of fish in artificial ponds
Title Hunters and Trappers
and creates favourable natural conditions
as far as possible by planting of weeds and
6224.1100
plants in water, keeping water at required
temperature etc. for hatching of fish. Fish Meal Maker
Transfers fish seeds to different ponds for
hatching and growth. Changes water in Fish Meal Maker makes fish meal powder
pond or tank periodically as guided by by dehydration, drying and grinding
VOLUME II B 36
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
processes for use as food for poultry, etc. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Feeds fresh fish into hand press to remove Code 6224
water and oil. Dries pressed fish in sun. Title Hunters and Trappers
Cuts dried fish into small pieces and grinds
them to powder by machine. Packs fish 6224.1400
meal powder in containers.
Net Maker
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Net Maker makes fishing nets and mends
Code 6224
torn or worn out ones using wooden
Title Hunters and Trappers
needle and thread. Fabricates nets to
required measurements to catch different
6224.1200
types of fish. Removes weeds entangled in
Rock Pilot nets during fishing and spreads them on
shore for drying. Examines nets for torn or
Rock Pilot leads pearl and chank divers worn out parts and sews them with
see and points out area for chank and wooden needle and nylon, cotton or
pearl fishing. Acquires knowledge and hemp threads using different knots as
condition of sea by intuition, heredity, required. Ties new floats or weights to
state of rock formation, etc. Goes out in nets. May tan and preserve nets. May fish
boats to sea with Divers. Points out area in deep sea or inland waters using
where pearls sea, inland and off-shore different kinds of nets. May assist
fishing. Fishermen in dragging net with catch or
boat to shore after fishing.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 6224 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Hunters and Trappers Code 6224
Title Hunters and Trappers
6224.1300
Man Duck 6224.9900
Hunters and Trappers, Other
Man Duck helps Pearls and Chank Divers
in various diving operations, connected Fishermen, Hunters, Trappers and Related
with pearl and chank fishing. Rows boats Workers, other perform varieties of
to distant places in sea. Releases rope routine and low-skilled tasks in cutting
with heavy weight attached above and and washing fish, boiling fish liver,
held by Diver to dive into sea. Hauls Pope preparing fish manure, etc. and are
to surface when Diver, reaches sea-bed designated: Fish Cutter cuts open fish
and releases it. Throws rope to Diver, by using knives, saws etc. for fish curing.
hand, if he gets separated for away from Removes fins, head. Large bones etc. of
boat to enable him to catch it and reach fish by cutting them away with knife, saw
boat. Receives pearl oysters or chanks etc. Cuts fish with hand knife to suitable
gathered by Divers and deposits them in sizes for curing. Fish Cutter and Washer
baskets. May fish in deep sea or inland removes fish gut and liver and washes fish
waters using different types of nets and for curing. Cuts with knife along abdomen.
tackles. Removes liver, viscera, gills and gut of fish.
Washes fish in water to remove blood and
VOLUME II B 37
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
impurities. Fish Liver Boiler boils shark and carrying out some processing of
liver in water to collect shark liver oil. produce; building and maintaining houses
Collects liver from sharks. Cuts liver to and other shelters; making tools, clothes
small bits and washes them in clean and utensils for use by the household;
water. Puts parts of liver in boiling water. selling or bartering some products at local
Skims off oil floating in boiling water. markets.
Collects oil in containers and sends it for
refining. Fish Manure Maker prepares fish Occupations in this Sub Division are
manure by dumping fish in compost pits classified into the following Groups:
and removing them after decomposition.
Digs pits of different sizes, dumps fish into 631 Subsistence Crop Farmers
pit and closes it with earth. Allows fish to
632 Subsistence Livestock Farmers
decompose. Opens it after specified
633 Subsistence Mixed Crop and
period and removes fish manure from pit.
Livestock Farmers
634 Subsistence Fishers, Hunters,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Trappers and Gatherers
Code
Title
Group 631
Sub Division 63 Subsistence Crop Farmers
Subsistence Farmers, Fishers, Subsistence crop farmers grow and
Hunters and Gatherers harvest field or tree and shrub crops,
vegetables and fruit, in order to provide
food, shelter and a minimum of cash
Subsistence farmers, fishers, hunters and
income for themselves and their
gatherers grow and harvest field or tree
households.
and shrub crops, vegetables and fruit,
gather wild fruits, medicinal and other
Occupations in this Group are classified
plants, tend or hunt animals, catch fish
into the following Families:
and gather various forms of aquatic life in
order to provide food, shelter and a
minimum of cash income for themselves 6310 Subsistence Crop Farmers
and their households.
Tasks performed by workers in this sub-
Family 6310
major group usually include- preparing the
Subsistence Crop Farmers
soil; sowing, planting, tending and
harvesting field crops; growing
Subsistence crop farmers grow and
vegetables, fruit and other tree and shrub
harvest field or tree and shrub crops,
crops; gathering wild fruits, medicinal and
vegetables and fruit, in order to provide
other plants; breeding, tending and
food, shelter and a minimum of cash
feeding animals and poultry mainly to
income for themselves and their
obtain meat, eggs, milk, hair, skin or other
households.
products; hunting or trapping animals;
catching fish and gathering other forms of
aquatic life; fetching water and gathering 6310.0100
firewood; storing produce for later use Tree Trimmer and Pruner
VOLUME II B 38
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
fields of mining and construction, form
Tree Trimmer and Pruner cuts away dead metal, erect metal structures, set machine
or excess branches from trees or shrubs to tools, or make, fit, maintain and repair
maintain right-of-way for roads, machinery, equipment or tools, carry out
sidewalks, or utilities, or to improve printing work as well as produce or
appearance, health, and value of tree. process foodstuffs, textiles, or wooden,
Prunes or treats trees or shrubs using metal and other articles, including
handsaws, pruning hooks, sheers, and handicraft goods. The work is carried out
clippers. May use pruning hooks, sheers, by hand and by hand powered and other
and clippers. Climb struck-mounted lifts tools, which are used to reduce the
and power pruners. May fill cavities in amount of physical effort and time
trees to promote healing and prevent required for specific tasks, as well as to
deterioration. Cuts away dead and excess improve the quality of the products. The
branches from trees, using handsaws, tasks call for an understanding of all
trees, using climbing hooks and belts, or stages of the production process, the
climbs ladders to gain access to work area. materials and tools used, and the nature
Prunes, cuts down, fertilizes, and sprays and purpose of the final product. Most
trees as directed by tree surgeon. Uses occupations in this division require skills at
truck-mounted hydraulic lifts and pruners second skill level.
and power pruners. Scrapes decayed
matter from cavities in trees and fills holes ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
with cement to promote healing and to Code 6310
prevent further deterioration. Applies tar Title Subsistence Crop Farmers
or other protective substances to cut
surfaces to seal surfaces against insects.
Group 632
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Subsistence Livestock Farmers
Code 6310
Title Subsistence Crop Farmers
Subsistence livestock farmers breed, raise
and tend livestock in order to provide
6310.9900
food, shelter and a minimum of cash
Subsistence Crop Farmers, Others
income for themselves and their
households.
Subsistence Agricultural and Fishery
Workers, other include those who grow Occupations in this Group are classified
and harvest field or tree and shrub crops, into the following Families:
grow vegetables and fruit, gather wild
fruits, medicinal and other plants, tend or
6320 Subsistence Livestock Farmers
hunt animals, catch fish and gather other
Family 6320
forms of aquatic life in order to provide
Subsistence Livestock Farmers
food, shelter and a minimum of cash
income for themselves and their
households not elsewhere classified. Subsistence livestock farmers breed, raise
CRAFT AND RELATED TRADES WORKERS and tend livestock in order to provide
Craft and related trades workers apply food, shelter and a minimum of cash
their specific knowledge and skills in the
VOLUME II B 39
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 6
income for themselves and their Subsistence fishers, hunters, trappers and
households. gatherers gather wild fruits, medicinal and
other plants, hunt and trap animals, catch
Group 633 fish and gather various forms of aquatic
life in order to provide food, shelter and a
minimum of cash income for themselves
Subsistence Mixed Crop and
and their households.
Livestock Farmers
Subsistence mixed crop and livestock
Occupations in this Group are classified
farmers grow and harvest field or tree and
into the following Families:
shrub crops, vegetables and fruit, gather
wild fruits, medicinal and other plants,
6340 Subsistence Fishers, Hunters,
tend or hunt animals, and/or catch fish
Trappers and Gatherers
and gather various forms of aquatic life in
order to provide food, shelter and a
minimum of cash income for themselves
Family 6340
and their households.
Subsistence Fishers, Hunters,
Occupations in this Group are classified Trappers and Gatherers
into the following Families:
Subsistence Fishers, Hunters, Trappers
6330 Subsistence Mixed Crop and and Gatherers gather wild fruits,
Livestock Farmers
medicinal and other plants, hunt and trap
animals, catch fish and gather various
Family 6330
forms of aquatic life in order to provide
Subsistence Mixed Crop and food, shelter and a minimum of cash
Livestock Farmers income for themselves and their
households.
Subsistence mixed crop and livestock
farmers grow and harvest field or tree and
shrub crops, vegetables and fruit, gather
wild fruits, medicinal and other plants,
tend or hunt animals, and/or catch fish
and gather various forms of aquatic life in
order to provide food, shelter and a
minimum of cash income for themselves
and their households.
Group 634
Subsistence Fishers, Hunters,
Trappers and Gatherers
VOLUME II B 40
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
articles, pottery, glass and related
products; producing handicrafts;
executing printing work; producing and
Division
processing foodstuffs and various articles
7
made of wood, textiles, leather and
related materials. Supervision of other
workers may be included.
Occupations in this Division are classified
Craft and Related Trades Workers
into the following Sub Divisions:
Craft and related trades workers apply
71 Building and Related Trade
specific knowledge and skills in the fields
Workers (Excluding Electricians)
to construct and maintain buildings, form
72 Metal, Machinery and Related
metal, erect metal structures, set machine
Trades Workers
tools, or make, fit, maintain and repair
machinery, equipment or tools, carry out 73 Handicraft and Printing Workers
printing work produce or process 74 Electrical and Electronics Trades
foodstuffs, textiles, or wooden, metal and Workers
other articles, including handicraft goods.
75 Food Processing, Woodworking,
The work is carried out by hand and by
Garment and Other Craft and
hand-powered and other tools which are
Related Trades Workers
used to reduce the amount of physical
effort and time required for specific tasks,
as well as to improve the quality of the
Sub Division 71
products. The tasks call for an
understanding of all stages of the Building and Related Trade
production process, the materials and Workers (Excluding Electricians)
tools used, and the nature and purpose of
the final product.
Building and related trades workers
Tasks performed by craft and related
construct, maintain and repair buildings,
trades workers usually include:
erect and repair foundations, walls and
constructing, maintaining and repairing
structures of brick, stone and similar
buildings and other structures; casting,
materials, shape and finish stone for
welding and shaping metal; installing and
building and other purposes, and extract
erecting heavy metal structures, tackle
and work solid minerals from
and related equipment; making
underground or surface mines or quarries.
machinery, tools, equipment, and other
The work is carried out by hand and by
metal articles; setting for operators, or
hand-powered and other tools which are
setting and operating various machine
used to reduce the amount of physical
tools; fitting, maintaining and repairing
effort and time required for specific tasks,
industrial machinery, including engines
as well as to improve the quality of the
and vehicles, as well as electrical and
products. The tasks call for an
electronic instruments and other
understanding of the work organization,
equipment; making
the materials and tools used, and the
precision instruments, jewellery,
nature and purpose of the final product.
household and other precious-metal
VOLUME II B 41
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Tasks performed by workers in this sub- Occupations in this Group are classified
major group include: constructing, into the following Families:
maintaining and repairing buildings and
other structures using traditional and/or 7111 House Builders
modern building techniques; constructing
7112 Bricklayers and Related Workers
and repairing foundations, walls and
7113 Stonemasons, Stone Cutters,
structures of brick, stone and similar
Splitters and Carvers
materials; breaking quarried stone into
7114 Concrete Placers, Concrete
slabs or blocks; cutting, shaping and
Finishers and Related Workers
finishing stone for building, ornamental,
7115 Carpenters and Joiners
monumental and other purposes; erecting
reinforced concrete frameworks and 7119 Building Frame and Related
structures as well as finishing and Traders Workers, Not Elsewhere
repairing cement surfaces; cutting, Classified
shaping, assembling and maintaining
wooden structures and fittings;
performing miscellaneous construction
Family 7111
and building maintenance tasks.
House Builders
Supervision of other workers may be
included.
House builders erect, maintain and repair
Occupations in this Sub Division are houses and similar small buildings using
classified into the following Groups: either traditional or modern techniques
and materials.
711 Building Frames and Related
Trades Workers 7111.0100
712 Building Finishers and Related Hut Maker
Trades Workers
713 Painters, Builders, Structure Hut Maker; Cottage Maker; Shanty Maker
Cleaners and Related Trades erects huts, cabin or similar dwellings with
Workers wooden planks poles, logs, bamboos, hay,
straw, reeds, dry leaves, etc., collects
necessary materials required for
Group 711
construction. Measures ground using pegs
Building Frames and Related Trades
and ropes and marks outline of hut by
Workers
digging earth along lines. Digs earth at
marked points using spade, shovel etc.
Building frame and related trades workers and fixes bamboo or wooden posts
construct, maintain and repair buildings, securely in pits to serve as supports and
erect and repair foundations, walls and pillars. Places poles horizontally on top of
structures of brick, stone and similar pillars and ties ends with strings or ropes.
materials, shape and finish stone for Fixes rafters to roof of hut in slanting
building and other purposes, and perform position to set hay straw or leaf as roofing
miscellaneous construction and building material. Covers sides of structure with
maintenance tasks straw, hay and plans of coconut, mango
trees, or others allowing space for doors
and windows. Places rafters as required to
VOLUME II B 42
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
secure and strengthen structure. Levels reeds, mud, planks, poles or leaves not
floor by ramming it with mixture of paste elsewhere classified.
of mud, water and straw dust, using hand
ramming wooden blocks and makes it ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
smooth and habitable. May thatch huts. Code 7111
May set tiles for roofing huts. Title House Builders
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Family 7112
Code 7111 Bricklayers and Related Workers
Title House Builders
Bricklayers and related workers lay bricks,
7111.0200
pre-cut stones and other types of building
Thatcher
blocks in mortar to construct and repair
walls, partitions, arches and other
Thatcher constructs roofs of huts and structures.
cottages from straw rashes, reeds or dry
palm leaves using shears or trimming
7112.0100
knife. Collects straw, dry leaves, reeds and
Stone Mason
bamboos of required length. Spreads
leaves, grass or reed as roofing material
Stone Mason; Stone Setter; Stone Fixer
over rafters or bamboos frame and
builds stone walls, pillars and other
securely ties them with twin rope as
structures by sizing and setting dressed or
required. Covers openings with extra
undressed stones. Receives instructions
straw or leaf to make it waterproof. Trims
regarding nature and type of work to be
edges uniformly to make sides look even.
done. Cuts stones to required size prior to
Places thatched frame over roof of hut
setting by chipping with chisel and other
with assistance of others and positions it
cutting tools and gets them dressed or
securely by fastening it with rafters and
dresses them if necessary. Gets mortar
beams. May construct straw huts and
prepared by labourers and spreads it with
small dwellings. May do rethatching of
trowel bit by bit over area where stones
cottage and hut roofs.
are to be fixed. Fixes stones manually one
by one in position and sets them by
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
tapping with hammer. Checks vertical and
Code 7111
horizontal alignments of set stones with
Title House Builders
plumb bob, ensures correct setting by
alterations if necessary and fills in gaps in
7111.9900
between stone slabs with stone chips and
Builders, Traditional Materials,
mortar. Removes excess mortar with
Other trowel to smoothen joints and stones to
raise structure as required. May dismantle
Builders, Traditional Materials, other masonry and reset girders if necessary.
include all those workers who erect, May do plastering, repairing and
maintain and repair small and large ornamental work. May lay stones on
buildings and other structures by using levelled ground to construct floors
traditional building techniques and pavements, streets, etc. May erect
materials such as bamboo, hay, straw, scaffolding for construction work.
VOLUME II B 43
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: NSQF Level 3
Code 7112
Title Bricklayers and Related Workers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7112
Title Bricklayers and Related Workers
7112.0200
Bricklayer, Construction 7112.0300
Bricklayer, Refractory
Bricklayer, Construction; Brick Mason lays
brick with mortar, and other construction Bricklayer, Refractory builds and repairs
material to construct and repair building- furnaces, ovens, kilns, fireboxes, fire
walls, arches, chimneys, floors, pillars and places and other high temperature
other structures. Receives instructions structures by laying and setting firebricks
regarding nature and type of work to be and refractory blocks, using chemical heat
done. Directs Labourers to prepare mortar resistant cement, fireclay, mortar etc.
in required proportions and water bricks. with hand tools. Receives instructions
Spreads mortar by trowel over foundation from appropriate authority regarding
or laid bricks and lays bricks by hand in nature and type of work to be done.
horizontal rows or designs and shapes per Spreads minimum possible fireclay mortar
approved specification. Taps bricks with evenly over furnace with trowel and lays
trowel to embed them firmly in mortar and taps fire bricks or refractory blocks in
and ensures correct vertical and position in correct alignment according to
horizontal alignment of brick setting by specification. Seals joints with fireclay
sight or with string and plumb bob. Closes mortar or chemically resistant cement to
gaps in between bricks by filling with half bind bricks together making provision for
bricks and mortar and by tapping with expansion of joints in furnace in linings.
trowel. Fixes wooden frames, lay lime Prepares support to proper curvature to
concrete over roofing and sets girders in replace arched roofs of furnaces or to
position. May dismantle masonry for construct new ones as directed or
reconstruction or facility of work. May do specified. Patches portions of furnaces
plastering, decoration pointing and repair with fireclay, as necessary and removes
work. May erect scaffolding. excess of mortar. May specialize in
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: building and repairing particular type of
Code 7112 high temperature construction. May
Title Bricklayers and Related Workers replace linings of ladles or tapping sports
of furnaces. May build new smoke
7112.0201 tunnels.
Plumbing Mason
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Plumbing Mason is responsible for making
Code 7112
masonry manholes, laying pipes in
Title Bricklayers and Related Workers
masonry works and other earth work
related to plumbing.
7112.0400
Qualification Pack Details: Paviour
QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0106
QP NOS Name Plumbing Mason
VOLUME II B 44
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Paviour lays bricks and stone on levelled corners with special care and directs
ground to make floors, pavements, streets workers to apply sealing coat (spreading
etc. Receives instructions regarding type of gravel or sand over tar coating).
of pavement, floor or street to be laid and Removes template and allows laid
other specifications and collects materials material to dry in sun before use. Is
required. Directs Labourers to level designated as BITUMEN SPRAYER if
surface for laying bricks and stones for engaged in spraying hot liquid bitumen on
required construction. Lays stone slabs or road surface with spray gun connected
bricks in line on levelled ground, by sizing with supply hose to tar heating tank. May
them if necessary with brick hammer and use special thermometer to ensure
trowel and tapes them to get set firmly in required temperature of molten tar.
position. Checks alignment while laying
using straight edge and spirit level and fills ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
gaps in between with chips, bricks bits, Code 7112
cement etc.; May do pre-stressed and R.C. Title Bricklayers and Related Workers
(reinforced concrete) work.
7112.0601
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Assistant Mason
Code 7112
Title Bricklayers and Related Workers
Assistant Mason needs to work as semi‐
skilled category tradesman and perform
7112.0500
tasks under instruction and close
Tar Supervisor supervision of Mason Level‐3 as Assistant
Mason. He is expected to carry out the
Tar Supervisor; Bitumen Supervisor setting and layout, laying of bricks and
supervises and guides laying of asphalt blocks, rendering coat plastering, finishing
(complex mixture of hydrocarbons) or of concrete, fixing doors and windows in a
other bituminous (inflammable mineral room/cubical while effectively engaging
substance) material over roads, roofs, etc. and supervising the Helper Mason under
for surfacing and water-proofing. Gets him for all trade relevant tasks. He should
drums filled with asphalt and other ensure trade specific compliance to
bituminous material heated on fire and environment, health and safety aspects
ensures proper melting and mixing of
contents. Directs workers to place Qualification Pack Details:
"templates" (pattern of wood, iron etc. QP NOS Reference CON/Q0102
used as guide for levelling) on road or roof QP NOS Name Assistant Mason
for proper laying and setting of asphalt NSQF Level 2
and other material. Puts on thin padding
or rubber gloves to protect remain ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
protected from burns, guides pouring of
Code 7112
molten material or base and spreads it
Title Bricklayers and Related Workers
uniformly over set area with mop brush or
other device. Ensures uniformity and even
spreading of tar or bituminous materials
7112.9900
on surface and applies subsequent coating
Bricklayers, Other
if needed. Lays tar over angles and
VOLUME II B 45
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Brick Layers, Stone Masons and Tile 7113.0300
Setters, Other include all other workers Stone Dresser, Hand
engaged in brick laying, tile setting, stone
masonry and like tasks, not elsewhere
Stone Dresser, Hand chips and chisels
classified.
stone to required size and shape and joins
surface using hand tools. Examines and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
selects blocks of granite, marble or other
Code 7112 stone according to prescribed
Title Bricklayers and Related Workers specifications. Places it in working
position, measures it with measuring
instruments such as scale, calliper-
Family 7113 compass, etc. and marks it out according
Stonemasons, Stone Cutters, to specification for cutting. Chips off
unwanted portion, sprinkles water over
Splitters and Carvers
stone to serve as coolant and gradually
finishes it to required size and shape.
Stonemasons, stone cutters, splitters and
Checks size and shape frequently while
carvers cut and shape hard and soft stone
chipping. May cut decorative designs on
blocks and slabs for the construction and
stone surfaces. May drill holes in stone if
maintenance of stone structures and
required.
monumental masonry, and carve designs
and figures in stone.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7113
7113.0200
Title Stonemasons Stone Cutters,
Stone Cutter, Hand Splitters and Carvers
Stone Cutter, Hand cuts and shapes 7113.0400
building and monumental stone from Stone Carver
rough blocks or slabs of granite, marble
etc. using pneumatic and hand tools.
Stone Carver carves out figures, letters
Places rough stone blocks or slabs in
and artistic designs on stone blocks, slabs
working position with aid of crane, hoist
or pillars to be erected or laid for
or other means. Marks out dimensional
construction of buildings, temples,
lines for cutting according to
monuments etc., using hand tools. Studies
specifications. Cuts block to required size,
drawings, designs, models, nature of
shape and other specifications by drilling,
carving and artistic features to be carved
chipping, splitting and chiselling stone
on stone. Selects appropriate stone such
with pneumatic and hand tools. Checks
as granite, green stone, soap stone,
size and shape frequently to ensure
marble, etc. as required. Places stone in
accuracy and prevent deep cutting.
working position and lays out figures,
designs, artistic features etc. on surface of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
stone with chalk, pencil or ochre solution
Code 7113 by freehand sketching with drawing
Title Stonemasons Stone Cutters, instruments and tracing papers or by
Splitters and Carvers taking measurements from model. Applies
thin layer of oil, if using granite stone and
VOLUME II B 46
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
carves out roughly along outline using ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
hand hammer and chisel of different Code 7113
shapes and sizes. Files rough surfaces and Title Stonemasons Stone Cutters,
brushes off dust as necessary while Splitters and Carvers
working. Sprinkles water on rough carving
if working on stone other than granite and 7113.9900
continues carving using small hammer and
Stone Splitters, Cutters and
fine chisels. Drills holes with hand drill, as
Carvers, Other
designed, using water as lubricant and
smoothens object to desired finish by
Stone Splitters, Cutters and Carvers, other
rubbing with stones. Checks work
include those stone splitters, cutter and
frequently against sketch or model while
carvers not elsewhere classified.
carving to ensure accuracy. May cut deep
slits using saw blades. May carve out
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
letters and figures and inlay them with
lead or stone of different colours. May Code 7113
first make clay model of carving to be Title Stonemasons Stone Cutters,
done. Splitters and Carvers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Family 7114
Code 7113 Concrete Placers, Concrete
Title Stonemasons Stone Cutters, Finishers and Related Workers
Splitters and Carvers
Concrete placers, concrete finishers and
7113.0500
related workers erect reinforced concrete
Stone Polisher, Hand frameworks and structures, make forms
for moulding concrete, reinforce concrete
Stone Polisher, Hand; Stone Finisher surfaces, cement openings in walls or
polishes and finishes surface of stone by casings for wells, finish and repair cement
rubbing it evenly with block of stone or surfaces and carry out terrazzo work.
other abrasives. Places stone in working
position on floor or working bench with 7114.0100
aid of helpers, hoist or crane. Sprinkles Concrete Moulder
water and Chambal sand on surface of
stone and rubs it with different kinds and
Concrete Moulder; Cement Block Moulder
grades of powder pumice or other
moulds and finishes cement concrete
abrasives, pours water frequently on
blocks of various shapes and sizes such as
surface thoroughly with water to remove
sills, beams, railing, flower vases and
abrasives. Rubs surface of stone with
other construction and decoration
polishing powder and cloth pad after
articles. Examines drawings and other
primary rubbing to obtain lustrous finish.
specifications and draws approximate
May specialize in polishing particular kind
estimates of material required. Selects
of stone, such as marble or granite and be
wooden mould of required size and
designated accordingly. May use portable
pattern. Mixes cement, sand, lime etc.
polishing machine.
and prepares cement concrete mortar by
adding requisite quantity of water to
VOLUME II B 47
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
them. Places and fixes required number of Title Concrete Placers, Concrete
sized iron rods into mould and pours Finishers and Related Workers
cement concrete mortar into it. Rams
concrete with iron rods to make it 7114.9900
compact. Levels surface of mould by filling Concrete Placers, Concrete
with concrete and smoothens it with
Finishers and Related Workers,
trowel and wooden smootheners. Allows
Other
concrete to settle for specified period in
mould for hardening. Removes shuttering,
Concrete Placers, Concrete Finishers and
soaks it in water for curing and gets it
Related Workers, other include all other
dried in shades. May cut artistic designs
workers who erect reinforced concrete
on cast material before it gets hard.
frameworks and structures, make forms
for moulding concrete, reinforce concrete
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
surfaces, cement openings in walls or
Code 7114
casings for wells, finish and repair cement
Title Concrete Placers, Concrete
surfaces and carry out terrazzo work not
Finishers and Related Workers
elsewhere classified.
7114.0200
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Cement Finisher
Code 7114
Title Concrete Placers, Concrete
Cement Finisher finishes surfaces of Finishers and Related Workers
concrete structures and smoothens
surfaces of freshly poured concrete Family 7115
sections. Cuts ridges, bumps and
Carpenters and Joiners
projecting wire from concrete surface
with chisel and hammer. Patches holes
Carpenters and joiners cut, shape,
and broken corners by wetting them,
assemble, erect, maintain and repair
spreading mortar into them and
various types of structures and fittings
smoothing surface with trowel or float.
made from wood and other materials.
Removes blemishes from and smoothens
surface by wetting or applying liquid
mixture of sand, cement and water and 7115.0100
rubbing with abrasive black. Finishes Carpenter, General
surface by wiping it with damp brush.
Levels, smoothens and shapes surfaces of Carpenter, General makes, assembles,
freshly poured concrete sections with alters and repairs wooden structures and
straight edge and float for fine finish and articles according to sample or drawing
edging tool to shape corners. May using hand or power tools or both. Studies
specialize in particular type of concrete drawing on sample to understand type of
finishing work and be designated structure or article to be made and
accordingly. calculates quantity of timber required.
Selects timber to suit requirements.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Marks them to size using square, scriber
Code 7114 etc. Saws, chisels and planes wooden
pieces to required sizes and makes
VOLUME II B 48
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
necessary joints such as half lap, Tenon shaping to ensure correctness. Assembles
mortice, dove-tail etc. using saws, planes, framework step by step by gluing,
mortising, chisels, drills and other cramping, dowelling, nailing and screwing
carpentry hand or power tools as as required. Examines finished article for
required. Checks parts frequently with accuracy. Fits metal rods, hinges etc., to
square, foot rule, measuring tape etc. to wood work where necessary and rectifies
ensure correctness. Assembles parts and defects in fittings if any. Sharpens his own
secures them in position by screwing, tools. May erect scaffoldings if necessary.
nailing or doweling. Checks assembled
structure with drawing or sample; rectifies ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
defects if any, and finishes it to required Code 7115
specifications. Alters, repairs or replaces Title Carpenters and Joiners
components in case of old structures or
articles in similar manner. May glue parts 7115.0201
together. May smoothen and finish
Assistant Shuttering Carpenter
surface with sand paper and polish. May
fix metal fittings to structure and polish.
Assistant Shuttering Carpenter works as
May fix metal fittings to structure or
semi-skilled category tradesman and
article made. May calculate cost of
performs tasks under instructions and
furniture. May sharpen his own tools.
close supervision of Shuttering Carpenter
Level-3 as an Assistant Shuttering
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Carpenter. He is expected to make,
Code 7115
assemble, erect and dismantle
Title Carpenters and Joiners
conventional/system formwork for all
type of in situ and pre-cast RCC work,
7115.0200
reading drawings, setting and layout. He
Carpenter, Construction should ensure trade specific compliance
of environment, health, safety aspects
Carpenter, Construction; Carpenter and should engage and supervise the
Building makes, assembles, alters and Helper Shuttering Carpenter under him
repairs doors, windows, frames and other for all relevant tasks.
wooden fixtures of building using hand or
power tools or both. Studies drawings or Qualification Pack Details:
samples and calculates quantity of timber QP NOS Reference CON/Q0302
required. Saws over size pieces by power QP NOS Name Assistant Shuttering
or hand tools or collects lumbers for Carpenter
making various components. Plans two NSQF Level 2
sides of above pieces, marks off
dimensions using tri-square, scriber, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
pencil etc., and reduces them to required
Code 7115
sizes by adzing, sawing and planning.
Title Carpenters and Joiners
Marks off different members, cuts them
7115.0300
as required and shapes and makes Tenon
Carpenter, Structural
and mortise, half lap and other joints by
sawing, chiselling, drilling and filling.
Carpenter, Structural builds, erects and
Checks pieces frequently while sizing and
repairs wooden structures such as
VOLUME II B 49
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
building frames, stage and studio fixtures, fit wooden wedges to tighten joints. May
roofs, walls, wooden shingles etc., using perform simple blacksmithy tasks.
hand or power tools or both. Studies
drawing or sample or receives instructions ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
regarding structure to be built and Code 7115
calculates quantity of timber required. Title Carpenters and Joiners
Selects required type of timber and marks
them for dimension using measuring tape, 7115.0500
square, pencil, etc. Sizes different parts
Joiner, Wood
from oversize pieces by sawing, adzing
and smoothening using power or hand
Joiner, Wood joins and assembles
tools. Makes necessary joints such as
prefabricated wooden-plank boards,
Tenon and mortise, scraf, half-lap etc., for
building-fixtures, etc. using hand or power
joining different members. Checks pieces
tools or both. Collects prefabricated
with square, measuring tape, foot rule
planks of required sizes. Joins required
etc., to ensure correctness. Assembles
number of planks with double ended nails
different parts or panels step by step to
to form sides of structure. Assembles
form complete structure. Sharpens his
framework step by step by nailing or
own tools. May carve designs and polish
screwing. Sharpens his own tools. May fit
structures.
strengthening band or mild steel hoop by
nailing or screwing for strengthening
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
boxes and cases, if necessary. May make
Code 7115
crate for packing. May be designated as
Title Carpenters and Joiners
WOODEN BOX MAKER; CARPENTER,
PACKING CASES if engaged in making
7115.0400
wooden boxes or packing cases of
Carpenter, Village specified dimensions.
Carpenter, Village makes and repairs ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
country ploughs, carts, doors, windows, Code 7115
frames and such other agricultural and Title Carpenters and Joiners
domestic articles by simple carpentry
processes using hand tools. Studies 7115.0600
sample and selects required type of
Lofts Man, Ship Building
timber and other materials. Cuts oversize
pieces, as required by sawing, adzing,
Lofts Man, Ship Building develops full size
chiselling and smoothening. Marks with
measurements from drawings to prepare
pencil, marking gauge or line and reel.
templates for manufacture of shell plates
Shapes different pieces and makes
and other parts of ship. Studies drawings,
necessary joints by smoothening, drilling,
considers elevation and draws full scale
chiselling etc. Assembles them part by
drawings with chalk on scrive board
part by nailing dowelling or screwing as
(wooden board on which various
necessary. Fits metal tyres to rim, blades
measurements are marked to enable
to ploughs, hinges and hasps and staples
drawing of shell, shell plate, margin plate
to doors etc., and ensures their proper
etc. for ship, to develop full scale
functioning. Sharpens his own tools. May
templates to be prepared) for making
VOLUME II B 50
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
templates. Draws full size lines of ship constant width but varying depth),
body on scrive board, ensures that plans aprons, uprights and other wood framing
of drawings of adjacent components in ship according to specifications and
agree and fit accurately and draws them shapes and finishes them. Nails or bolts
to full scale on it using scale contours, metal fittings, plates and bulk heads to
chalks etc. Instructs Carpenter in wooden parts of ship using brace, drill
preparation of templates according to bits, augers, spanners etc. and ensures
dimensions drawn on scrive board and correct alignment of hull, frame and
marks instructions on them with ink for fittings. Levels ground ways, runners,
guidance of fabrication section. Issues wooden blocks etc., erects props, fastens
templates to concerned section, explains standing ways by wire ropes, fits
details of measurements for fabrication of launching triggers and performs related
steel panels to form various components tasks to prepare entire launching ways to
of ship body and receives them back after launch a ship. Gets all material and timber
use. Stores templates in prescribed place salvaged after launching for use in
for further use and maintains their subsequent operation.
account.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 7115
Code 7115 Title Carpenters and Joiners
Title Carpenters and Joiners
7115.0800
7115.0700 Lascar Stager, Ship Building
Shipwright
Lascar Stager, Ship Building erects
Shipwright erects props and temporary temporary wooden structures and
structures to stabilize and support ship scaffoldings for placing staging planks
during, construction and repairs in shore. inside and outside ship under construction
Aligns ship structure according to or repairs to facilitate work. Erects steel or
designed centre line and angle of declivity tubular uprights and ledgers or cross bars
and plots and marks reference points and for resting staging planks as guided by
lines on building dock or way to maintain Serang and keeps them secure from
alignment of vessel during construction or strong winds and accidents. Assists
repairs, using transit, plumb bob, tapes Shipwright, Wood as directed and
and levels. Builds keel blocks, bilge blocks, dismantles scaffoldings and other wooden
cradles and shoring for supporting slip in structures to arrange launching of ship. Is
dry dock, building docks etc. using power designated as SERANG, SHIP BUILDING if
and hand wood-working tools. Positions engaged in building and supervising
and secures blocking and other structures erection and removal of wooden
on dock platform according to ship’s blue- structures and scaffoldings and related
prints. Aligns vessel over blocks and tasks. May assist Shipwright in aligning
establishes reference points and lines on ship structure and perform other tasks as
ship’s hull for locating machinery and guided.
other equipment in accordance with ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ship’s alignment and shape. Fabricates Code 7115
and installs furring pieces (timber strips of Title Carpenters and Joiners
VOLUME II B 51
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7115.1100 heating them on fire and bending them
Carpenter Worker, Boat Building lightly with hand as required. Fixes planks
on templates with brass screws, nails ribs
on bull with copper nails and rivets planks
Carpenter Worker, Boat Building designs
and ribs together as specified. Fits
boats and guides Carpenters, Boat
wooden clamps, mounts and fixes
Building, Wood Sawyers, Hand etc. in
stringers (thick wooden planks) knee
constructing them according to
(wooden block between wooden clamps
specifications. Designs small boats and
and built joints inside hull) etc. as
rafts; watches construction of templates,
required. Removes templates from
ribs, planking etc.; and guides
completed boat. Bores holes over
construction at every stage of checks;
required part of hull, fixes engine
laying of keel, setting of templates, fitting
foundation, lowers engine on foundation
of ribs etc. and corrects them if necessary.
by chain block and secures it in position
Checks broken ribs and prescribes
with bolts and nuts. Determines propeller
dimensions for fitting new ones. Examines
shaft alignment and bolts shaft to engine
planks for ‘grains’, instructs carpenters to
coupling. Hoists and fixes decks, chains,
insert small pegs where ‘knots’ are found
mast, booms etc. on boat as per
and ensures correct riveting of planks on
requirements. Fits copper sheeting over
ribs. Draws ‘mould loft’ (full scale
outer portion of hull with copper nails and
drawing) based on design on platform and
fixes rudder, rudder-shoe, exhaust pipe
guides Carpenters in engine, davit (side
and such other accessories on boat as
crane), winch and other installations,
specified. Performs all wood work repairs
shaft alignment, rudder fitting, copper-
to boats, larges etc. under guidance of
sheet fitting, cabin fixture settings, etc. on
Carpenter Mistry, Boat Building. May
boats. May supervise workers in saw mill
construct wooden accessories for boats
attached to boat-building yard if required.
such as engine foundation, templates, ribs
etc.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7115
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Carpenters and Joiners
Code 7115
Title Carpenters and Joiners
7115.1200
Carpenter, Boat Building
7115.1300
Caulker, Boat Building
Carpenter, Boat Building constructs and
repairs boats, launches dredgers, barges
Caulker, Boat Building caulks seams of
etc. according to prescribed specifications
deck, hull and keel of boat with caulking
by various carpentry processes. Lays keel
material, using hand tools. Mixes caulking
on wooden fixtures and fits stem, stern
materials such as caulking cotton and
and templates as to keel with bolts and
oakum in coconut oil or pitch in castor oil.
nuts. Places cut planks on skeleton of boat
Makes clearances with chisel on seams
to ascertain suitability and remodels their
and plank joints where required. Inserts
shape, if required, with hand tools.
caulking material by hand and blunt chisel
Seasons planks and ribs (wooden reapers)
inside clearances made and beats with
either with steam in masonry steam box
hammer to push caulking material lightly
(gutter) or by applying oil over articles,
VOLUME II B 52
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
into them. Observes caulked portions to Well Digger
ascertain defective caulking and rectifies
them by inserting further layers of Well Digger digs wells to obtain water and
material, if necessary. Melts rosin and vep for constructing base for structural
oil in fire and strains and mixers it columns and pillars. Examines earth to
(mixture) with required quantity of quick- select digging implements such as shovel,
lime to make Putty. Applies putty by hand hammer, etc. Locates area and marks
over caulked portions on boat. Examines outline on ground. Digs pit by excavating
and applies final touch as putty where earth with pick axe and shovel and bails
necessary. May prepare putty with paint, out excavated earth using basket. Fixes
chalk and linseed oil to apply it over tripod structure over well to facilitate
portions above water level and where digging and bailing out of mud from depth
copper sheeting are not provided. and repeats process of digging and
excavating earth to required depth. Sets
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: baked earthen or prefabricated cement
Code 7115 concrete rings from water level up to
Title Carpenters and Joiners surface in well to prevent caving of
surrounding soil into it. Raises surface
7115.9900 structure around well by securely setting
Carpenters and Joiners Operatives, some more cement or earthen rings or
gets cover wall constructed around it up
Other
to suitable height to prevent accidental
fall into it. May get brick wall gradually
Carpentry and Joinery Operatives, other
constructed and sunk around total depth
perform variety of routine and low skilled
of dug earth in well, particularly in areas
tasks such as sawing, cleaning, rough
having soft soil. May pump out water
planning, drilling etc., and may be
through bucket or hand pump. May blast
designated as Carpenter Mate, Carpenter
rocks with dynamite.
Helper, Joiner Helper, etc.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7119
Code 7115
Title Building Frame and Related
Title Carpenters and Joiners
Traders Workers, n.e.c.
Family 7119
7119.0200
Building Frame and Related Traders
White Washer
Workers, Not Elsewhere Classified
White Washer applies white or colour
This family covers building frame and wash in wall ceiling etc. using hand brush.
related trades workers not classified Studies colour scheme and estimates
elsewhere in group 711, Building frame material required. Selects lime or colour
and related trades workers. For instance, according to specification and prepares
the group includes steeplejacks, colour or white lime solution mixing it
scaffolders and demolition workers. with water. Strains mixture and visually
tests its density and shade. Makes end of
7119.0100 washing brush soft and uniform. Scrapes
VOLUME II B 53
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
and cleans surface to be white washed Code 7119
and washes wall or ceiling with lime or Title Building Frame and Related
colour using hand brush. Examines Traders Workers, n.e.c.
washing after drying and applies second
coat on defective patches to make it look
uniform. May do minor plastering repairs. Group 712
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Building Finishers and Related
Code 7119 Trades Workers
Title Building Frame and Related
Traders Workers, n.e.c.
Building finishers and related trades
workers cover, apply or install, maintain
7119.0301
and repair roofs, floors, walls, insulation
Assistant Scaffolder systems, glass in windows or other
frames, as well as plumbing, piping and
Assistant Scaffolder is able to put up electrical systems in buildings and other
scaffold, rigs, guard rails and planks structures.
securely and fix the items at heights by
observing and ensuring all safety and Occupations in this Group are classified
security measures. The main task of into the following Families:
scaffolder is to erect scaffolding, shoring
or brace, select tools, equipment and 7121 Roofers
materials from yard and transport item to
7122 Floor Layers and Tile Setters
site.
7123 Plasterers
7124 Insulation Workers
Qualification Pack Details:
7125 Glaziers
QP NOS Reference CON/Q0303
QP NOS Name Assistant Scaffolder 7126 Plumbers and Pipe Fitters
NSQF Level 2 7127 Air Conditioning and Refrigeration
Mechanics
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7119 Family 7121
Title Building Frame and Related
Roofers
Traders Workers, n.e.c.
Roofers build and repair roofs on all types
7119.9900
of buildings using one or more kinds of
Building Frame and Related Trades
materials.
Workers, other
7121.0100
Building Frame and Related Trades
Tile Layer, Roof
Workers, other include workers engaged
in building frame and related trades tasks
Tile Layer, Roof lays and sets tiles over
not elsewhere classified.
rafters joining them with mortar to make
roofs of buildings. Measures location for
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
each row of tiles over rafters and
VOLUME II B 54
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
estimates quality and quantity of material or mosaic panels for decorative or other
required. Marks guide lines with chalk. purposes.
Discards defective tiles and places good
tiles in position on buttons over rafters 7122.0100
adjusting them in grooves by hand as
Tile Setter
required and cutting and shaping them
wherever necessary for proper setting and
Tile Setter; Tile Layer fits and sets tiles to
alignment. Inserts nails or cement mortar
walls, floors and ceilings of buildings
in between tiles to fix and make them
according to specified design using
water tight. Fills gap between tiles or
cement or other mortar and hand tools.
covers exposed nails with cement. Cleans
Receives instructions regarding
surface of tiles using gunny bag and
specifications, layout and material to be
water. Ensures proper setting of tiles by
used. Soaks tiles in water to prepare them
observation and using alignment string
for setting. Applies mortar or cement coat
and wooden level. May replace broken
over wall with trowel and lays tiles aligned
tiles and punch holes where required.
in rows according to pattern. Checks
alignment of tiles laid with straight edge,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
levelling hoard, spirit level etc., makes
Code 7121
adjustments if necessary and taps them
Title Roofers
with trowel handle to get them set firmly.
Sprinkles dry cement over freshly laid
7121.9900
concrete for laying floor tiles and ensures
Roofers, Other proper bond between cement and tiles
while laying. Cuts and shapes tiles for
Roofers, Other include all other workers corner pieces, fills gaps with cement as
engaged in roofing buildings and necessary and ensures proper joining
structures such as those setting and fixing setting and alignment. May erect
galvanized iron, asbestos sheets, or other scaffolding for setting ceiling tiles.
materials for roofing purposes, mending
leakages in them by repairs or ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
replacements, etc., not elsewhere Code 7122
classified. Title Floor Layers and Tile Setters
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 7122.0200
Code 7121 Concrete Mixer (Mosaic Tile)
Title Roofers
Concrete Mixer, Mosaic Tile makes ready
mix (mall) for making mosaic tiles by
Family 7122
mixing cement, marble chips and other
colouring ingredients in water. Studies
Floor Layers and Tile Setters
requirements of customers and evolves
colour pattern scheme and shades.
Floor layers and tile setters install, Measures required quantity of cement,
maintain and repair flooring, and cover marble powder or chips and colouring
floors, walls and other surfaces with tiles powder (oxides) and places them in
container. Adds prescribed quantity of
VOLUME II B 55
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
water to mixture. Mixes it uniformly using Planer (Mosaic Tile)
hand trowel to make paste of required
consistency. Places ready mix (mall) near Planer, Mosaic Tile operates smoothening
tile presser for making mosaic tiles. machine to grind surface of mosaic tiles to
Checks whether mixture conforms to evenness and to expose marble chips to
required colour and shade by making view. Starts machine fitted with revolving
sample tile and alters proportion of circular metal plate. Places tiles on
mixture to attain required colour revolving bed of machine with smooth
combination if necessary. May operate side of tiles facing metal plate on entire
tile pressing machine. area of circular bed. Fills tanks placed
above machine with water and sand and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: opens them to allow water and sand to
Code 7122 fall on rotating bed in prescribed ratio.
Title Floor Layers and Tile Setters Watches tiles getting ground by mixture
of water and sand in metal bed for
7122.0300 prescribed period of time and ensures
Tile Presser (Mosaic) required finish. Removes ground or
planed tiles from bed of machine and
replaces them with fresh tiles. Keeps place
Tile Presser, Mosaic makes coloured
neat and tidy.
mosaic tiles for floor walls etc. according
to design. Places metal mould of required
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
size on table, cleans it with brush and
applies linseed oil on its surface. Fills Code 7122
mould manually with prescribed quantity Title Floor Layers and Tile Setters
of cement mixture (mall) containing
marble chips or powder. Levels mixture in 7122.0500
mould using metal spreader. Sprays dry Mosaic Layer
(nead) cement powder over mixture for
absorbing moisture when pressed. Fills Mosaic Layer; Terrazzo Layer lays mosaic
layer of cement powder with wet mixture surface and floors according to specified
of cement and sand and closes mould designs using stone chips cement sand
with metal lid or cover. Places filled mould etc. and gives glossy finish to surface.
under hand or hydraulic press and Examine drawings and pattern of mosaic
operates it by levers to press mixture in laying and estimates material required.
mould to form tiles of required shape. Selects material like stone chips of
Removes pressed mould and dismantles required colour, cement, sand etc. and
frame. Removes pressed title places it on mixes them together in water or takes up
racks for drying before curing it in water mosaic panels, mosaic tiles, stones,
and repeats process. May repair hand or ceramic, opaque coloured glass and
hydraulic presses. similar other material as designed.
Prepares ground by setting levels and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: laying cement mixture or lime mortar to
Code 7122 required thickness. Allows cement floor to
Title Floor Layers and Tile Setters set and dry. Rakes-out (clips off) cement
floor with trowel or otherwise to create
7122.0400 unevenness over surface and spreads
VOLUME II B 56
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
coating of mosaic plaster material over it. 7122.9900
Levels and smoothens it with trowel and Floor Layers and Tile Setters, Other
wooden smoothener and cures it with
water for specified period. Grinds surface
Floor Layers and Tile Setters, Other
with stones to give glossy finish. Pour
include all other workers engaged in floor
noad cement (Mixture of cement and
laying and tile setting, like tasks, not
water) on surface for grouting, lays mosaic
elsewhere classified.
tiles and panels on it according to design,
if necessary after sizing them, levels them
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
with wooden leveller to ensure uniform
Code 7122
height and fills gaps in between them with
Title Floor Layers and Tile Setters
cement of matching colour if engaged in
laying precast tiles and panels. Ensures
Family 7123
proper setting and cures laid tiles and
panel, sprinkling water as required. Cleans Plasterers
surface by rubbing with polishing machine
or hand grinding stones and cleans it with Plasterers install, maintain and repair
gunny bag. May apply finishing and plasterboard in buildings, and apply
shining polish. May cut mosaic panels out decorative and protective coverings of
of bigger pieces. plaster, cement and similar material to
the interiors and exteriors of structures.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7122 7123.0100
Title Floor Layers and Tile Setters
Plasterer
7122.0600
Plasterer plasters walls, ceilings and other
Parquetry Floor Layer
surface of structures with cement, lime,
mud or other mortar using hand trowel,
Parquetry Floor Layer lays all kinds of level etc. Mixes sand, cement, lime brick
ornamental parquetry floor designs powder etc. in required proportion adding
according to lay-outs furnished by water to it to prepare plastering mortar.
Architect. Studies design and shapes and Wets structure to be plastered with water
finishes required type of wood to ensure proper adherence; spreads
accordingly. Covers sub-floor with building plaster with trowel to give preliminary
paper or other material to protect wood coating. Levels and smoothens primary
from moisture. Nails wood flooring coat of plaster with straight edge, shapes
according to design, if necessary by borders to guide second coating and
further tooling to suit dimensions. May scratches surface of primary coat to
secure floor to mastic or asphalt base provide bond for subsequent coating.
without using nails. May hammer narrow Plasters area to be covered with primary
strips of wood into place on asphalt- coat and allows it to set for some time
mastic base. ensuring that it does not get dry before
final coating. Applies thin layer of finish
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: plastering coat over surface, makes out
Code 7122 corners and angles to suit it and
Title Floor Layers and Tile Setters smoothens plastered area with straight
VOLUME II B 57
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
edge and trowel. Directs and supervises slabs to walls and ceilings for additional
sprinkling of water for curing during security. Saws slabs to make them fit at
plastering and watches drying and final ends of courses and around outlets and
outcome of surface. May undertake fixtures. May construct interior insulating
ornamental plastering. walls by fixing courses of compressed cork
blocks one upon another with cementing
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: substance. May finish cork surface of walls
Code 7123 and ceilings with plaster or spread
Title Plasterers concrete over floor slabs to form wearing
floor.
7123.9900
Plasterers, Other ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7124
Plasterers, other include workers who Title Insulation Workers
install and repair laths and apply plaster
to walls and ceilings of buildings not 7124.0200
elsewhere classified. Acoustical Insulator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Acoustical Insulator applies adhesive
Code 7123 sound absorbing material upon ceilings
Title Plasterers and other surfaces with power driven
machine to reverberation of sound.
Family 7124 Prepares machine for operation by filling
Insulation Workers container with insulating material. Starts
machine and directs hose nozzle towards
surface to be covered. Applies insulating
Insulation workers apply and repair
material to surface in even layer of
insulating materials to buildings, boilers,
required thickness. (Excluded are workers
pipes or refrigeration and air-conditioning
who fit acoustical boards by hand to
equipment.
surfaces).
7124.0100
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Building Insulator, Hand
Code 7124
Title Insulation Workers
Building Insulator, Hand applies slabs or
bats (sheets) of insulating material, such 7124.0300
as cork or spun glass, to walls, floors and
Insulator, Boilers and Pipes
ceilings in buildings. Examines drawings
and other specifications. Nails or wires
Insulator, Boilers and Pipes applies
bats of insulating material, such as rock
insulating material such as asbestos
wood or spun glass to interiors of walls,
mastic, cork, felt or mineral wool to
on attic roofs and on bottom of floors, or
exposed hot or cold surfaces of
spreads hot asphalt on surface and
equipment such as boilers, pipes or tanks.
embeds courses of cork slabs in it, or
Cleans surface of object to be insulated.
spreads cement mortar with trowel on
Binds heavy wires around object and
slabs and sticks them to surface. Nails
attaches small tie wires to them. Applies
VOLUME II B 58
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
base coating of asbestos mastic or Code 7124
insulating cement to surface or covers Title Insulation Workers
object with layer of insulating material.
Covers base or coating or layer with wire 7124.9900
netting to reinforce insulation. Fastens Insulation Workers, Other
netting in place with small tie wires.
Applies one or more coatings over wire
Insulators, other include all other workers
netting and smooths final coat with
engaged in various tasks in insulating
trowel. May cover object with felt bound
plants, buildings and equipment, not
with wire or with gauze covered with
elsewhere classified.
plaster of Paris. May cover insulated
pipes, etc., with strips of canvas or
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sacking. May paint or whitewash
Code 7124
insulating surface.
Title Insulation Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Family 7125
Code 7124
Glaziers
Title Insulation Workers
7124.0400 Glaziers measure, cut, finish, fit and install
Insulator, Refrigeration and Air flat glass and mirrors.
Conditioning Equipment
7125.0100
Insulator, Refrigeration and Air Glazier, (Construction)
Conditioning Equipment insulates
refrigeration and air-conditioning Glazier; Glass Fitter; Glass Setter
equipment with various materials, such as (Construction) cuts glass panes or plates
cork or asbestos, to retain desired to required size and shape and sets them
temperature. Shapes, trims and smooths into doors, windows, skylights, show-
insulating sheets and blocks to cover and cases, partition of buildings etc. using
to fit parts of equipment such as hand tools. Measures frame where glass is
expansion chamber, condenser and to be fixed and selects required type of
piping. Applies waterproof cement to glass sheet. Marks glass according to
insulating material and surfaces of measurements, cuts it along markings and
members to be insulated and presses smoothens edges using hand tools. Mixes
them together. Secures insulating chemical ingredients in set proportions to
material with wire and wire netting. prepare putty for fixing glass. Cleans
Applies one or more layers of asbestos frame in which glass pane is to be fixed
plaster over wire netting with trowel. and secures it in frame with nails, metal
Packs walls or partly assembled casing spring or spring clips. Applies putty evenly
with sheets or loose particles of insulating on edges firmly to secure glass pane on
material. May apply insulating material to frame and smoothens with blunt knife or
hot or cold air ducts and pipes. otherwise to ensure desired finish. May fix
glass in metal frames by providing rubber
lining.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 59
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: at ends of wooden frame pieces and
Code 7125 fastens them together with nails to make
Title Glaziers frame. Places glass sheet on working
bench and marks outlines according to
7125.0200 required measurements. Cuts glass along
marking with cutting tool and smoothens
Glazier, Vehicle
its edges. Cuts plywood and cardboard
pieces to size using hand saw and scissors.
Glazier, Vehicle cuts ordinary and
Fixes Glass in frame, puts picture facing
pressurised glass or moulded cellulose
glass over it and places cardboard and
acetate to correct size and fits them in
plywood on reverse of picture. Drives
frame of windows, wind-shields, and
small nails suitably on rear of frame to
doors of automobiles, aircrafts, railways
hold mounted picture compact and secure
and tram coaches etc. edging them with
glues plain or decorative paper at back;
rubber or leather packing. Measures size
fixes hook on frame to facilitate hanging.
of door, window, wind-shield frame etc.
Is designated as MIRROR FRAMER if
where glass is to be fixed. Selects
specialized or engaged in framing mirrors.
appropriate type of glass, cuts it with
May use only cardboard on reverse side
cutting tool according to requirements
for mounting ordinary pictures. May
and smoothens edges with hand grinder.
polish or varnish picture and mirror
Heats pressurised and shatter proof glass
frames. May grind glass edges by grinding
panels along marked line and breaks it by
machine.
pressing with hands to required size. Fixes
channelling rubber, rubber-lining or
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
leather around edges of glass and sets and
Code 7125
secures glass firmly in groove. Oils locks
Title Glaziers
and sets locking chain device while fixing
glass panels in automobile doors and
7125.9900
ensures their easy raising and lowering
operations. Checks and ensures proper Glaziers, Other
setting and fixing of glass by tapping it Glaziers, other include all other workers
with hand to feel resistance to wind engaged in different tasks, glazing
vibrations produced in running vehicles. operations in vehicles, buildings and other
May polish glass. structures, not elsewhere classified.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7125 Code 7125
Title Glaziers Title Glaziers
Family 7126
7125.0300 Plumbers and Pipe Fitters
Picture Framer
Plumbers and pipe fitters assemble,
Picture Framer; Photo Framer cuts glass, install, repair and maintain pipe systems,
frame pieces and cardboard to required fittings and fixtures for water, gas,
size and mounts pictures and photos in drainage, sewerage systems, and
frame. Measures size of pictures and cuts hydraulic and pneumatic equipment.
frame pieces to required size. Cuts joints
VOLUME II B 60
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7126.0101 7126.0102
Plumber, General Plumber, Operations
Plumber, General lays out, assembles, Plumber (Operations) is responsible for
installs and maintains sanitary fittings and operation of plumbing system used in
fixtures, sewage and drainage systems, housing, commercial and institutional
heating and sanitary systems, gas and setups.
water pipe lines etc. Receives instructions
from Sanitary Engineer or Civil Engineer Qualification Pack Details:
regarding lay out of pipes, gas or water QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0108
mains, position of fixtures and fittings, etc. QP NOS Name Plumber
Examines drawings or other specifications (Operations)
regarding size and dimensions of area NSQF Level 3
where sanitary fittings or pipe are to be
fitted or laid. Marks points at places to ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
indicate position for fixing brackets and Code 7126
laying pipes. Drills passage holes in walls Title Plumbers and Pipe Fitters
or floor of premises and fixes necessary
brackets, stands, holders etc. to keep or 7126.0103
hold fittings and fixtures in position, using
Plumber, General-Installation and
nuts, bolts, clamps etc. and tightens them
Repair
with hand tools. Cuts reams, threads and
bends pipes as appropriate. Ensures that
Plumber (General)-II is responsible for
pipe lines are laid properly by Pipe Fitter.
installation and repair plumbing systems
Joins pipes with sockets, Tees, elbow etc.
including those of advanced sanitary
or with molten lead or lead wool. Caulks
fixtures as per manufacturer’s
joints (operation of making joint seam
specifications in housing, commercial and
tight to withstand pressure) and tests
institutional setups.
them for leaks with pneumatic or
hydraulic pressure. May repair and
Qualification Pack Details:
maintain sewerage and pipe lines by
replacing washers on leaky faucets, QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0110
mending burst pipes, opening clogged QP NOS Name Plumber (General)-II
drains, etc. May do lead burning, dressing NSQF Level 4
and bossing of lead pipe and sheet lead, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
inlaying of wooden tanks, construction of Code 7126
septic tanks etc. Title Plumbers and Pipe Fitters
Qualification Pack Details: 7126.0104
QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0104 Plumber, General Helper
QP NOS Name Plumber (General)
NSQF Level 3 Plumber (General) Helper is responsible
for helping Plumber (General) by carrying
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and handling of tools and materials
Code 7126 required in installation, minor repair and
Title Plumbers and Pipe Fitters maintenance of plumbing systems.
VOLUME II B 61
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Qualification Pack Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0101 Code 7126
QP NOS Name Plumber (General) Title Plumbers and Pipe Fitters
Helper
NSQF Level 1 7126.0107
Plumber, Maintenance and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Servicing
Code 7126
Title Plumbers and Pipe Fitters
Plumber (Maintenance and Servicing) is
responsible for assistance in maintenance
7126.0105
and servicing of pipes and sanitary fixtures
Plumber, General Assistant in housing, commercial and institutional
setups.
Plumber (General) Assistant is responsible
for assistance in, preliminary installation Qualification Pack Details:
and minor repair work of basic plumbing QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0112
systems in domestic, commercial and QP NOS Name Plumber
institutional setups. (Maintenance &
Servicing)
Qualification Pack Details: SQ. Level 3
QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0102
QP NOS Name Plumber (General) ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Assistant
Code 7126
NSQF Level 2
Title Plumbers and Pipe Fitters
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7126 7126.0201
Title Plumbers and Pipe Fitters
Pipe Layer/Plumber Pipeline
7126.0106
Pipe Layer; Sewer Pipe Layer lays
Plumber, Maintenance and
concrete, stone ware or clay pipes to form
Servicing Assistant sanitary drains and sewers. Receives
instructions regarding size and type of
Plumber (Maintenance and Servicing) concrete, stone ware or clay pipe to be
Assistant is responsible for assistance in laid. Digs or gets earth dug along marked
maintenance and servicing of pipes and lines using spade, picks etc. to make
sanitary fixtures in housing, commercial trenches for laying pipes. Levels and
and institutional setups. smoothens bottom of trenches to proper
gradient by scooping with shovels.
Qualification Pack Details: Receives pipes of required size lowered
QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0109 into trench manually or by pulley and
QP NOS Name Plumber adjusts their position by hand or crow-bar
(Maintenance & for correct levelling and vertical and
Servicing) Assistant horizontal alignment. Joints pipes
NSQF Level 2 together using appropriate couplings,
joints, rings etc. and closes joints by
VOLUME II B 62
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
caulking with fibre and cement to prevent replaces leaky pipe lines, taps and joints
leakage. Tests joints by hydraulic or and provides connections to overhead
pneumatic pressure after sealing. Fills water tanks. Helps Plumber, General in
trench with earth to cover laid pipe and fittings sanitary fittings to buildings. May
rams earth to avoid sinking. Is designated join pipe sections and fittings.
as PIPE LAYER WATERMAINS or WATER
MAINS FITTER if engaged in laying cast Qualification Pack Details:
iron or galvanized iron water pipe mains QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0108
and in caulking their joints with lead to QP NOS Name Plumbing (Sanitary
prevent leakage. May lay pipe lines to Fixtures) Fitter
provide water connection to houses, Assistant
sanitary sewers etc. May fix meters to NSQF Level 3
stopcocks, remove defects from pipe lines
and replace defective ones. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7126
Qualification Pack Details:
Title Plumbers and Pipe Fitters
QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0107
QP NOS Name Plumber Pipeline 7126.0400
NSQF Level 3
Straightening Machine Operator
(Iron and Steel)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7126
Straightening Machine Operator, Iron and
Title Plumbers and Pipe Fitters
steel operates hydraulic, mechanical or
pneumatic straightening machine to
7126.0301
straighten girders, bars, tubes, joints,
Pipe Fitter
plates, angle irons, rails, etc., to required
accuracy. Sets metal to be straightened
Pipe Fitter lays repairs and maintains, between fixed supports on machine bed
pipes for supply of water, gas, oil or steam using crane and with assistance of helpers
in buildings, gardens, workshops, stores, as necessary. Locates bent portion of
ships etc., according to drawings or metal to be straightened, by sight, scale or
instructions. Examines drawings and other level. Starts machine. Manipulates hand
specifications or receives relevant wheel of machine to lower or raise
instructions. Cuts passage holes for laying moving ram of machine over metal object
pipes in walls and floors. Cuts reams, to be straightened. Adjusts stroke of ram
threads and bends pipes according to to required pressure according to nature
specifications. Lays pipes in cut passage and extend of bend. Changes position of
and assembles pipe sections with metal object either by turning or shifting it
couplings, sockets, Tee's elbows etc. by hand or moving it to position by hoist
Levels position of pipes using sprit level for removing bend to required accuracy.
for gravitational flow. Caulks joints, tests Checks object by sight or with straight
them for leakage with pneumatic or edge, scale or level to ensure that curves
hydraulic pressure and secures pipe line or bends are straightened to required
to structure with clamps, brackets, and accuracy. Removes straightened metal
hangers. Fits water meters, taps etc. to object from table with assistance of
pipe where necessary. Repairs and helpers or using hoisting equipment. May
VOLUME II B 63
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
oil and clean machine. May do minor chipper to rotate chisel or cutting tool at
repairs to machine. high speed and chips off excess metal and
burrs from castings, riveting points, joints,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: angles etc., by pressing it over marked
Code 7126 area. Manipulates machine as necessary
Title Plumbers and Pipe Fitters and observes metal getting smooth finish.
Stops machine and examines chipped area
7126.0500 for finish and accuracy by feel of hand or
by using tools. Cleans and oils machine
Puncher, Metal
periodically.
Puncher, Metal punches, drills and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
countersinks holes in strip-plates, boiler
Code 7126
frames and other metal parts by machine
Title Plumbers and Pipe Fitters
or hand tools. Studies drawings and other
specifications to understand nature of
7126.9900
punching operation required. Selects
proper size punch and screws it into upper Plumbers and Pipe Fitters, Other
jaw of machine. Hoists and places plate to
be punched between die and punch. Plumbers and Pipe Fitters, other perform
Aligns hole mark on metal part accurately number of routine and low skilled tasks
under punch. Starts machine and releases such as assisting in laying pipes, making
foot pedal to cause punch descend water tight joints, fitting sockets and
through plate and cut hole over marked reducers, threading pipes with taps and
area. Changes position of metal and dies, removing leakages, etc., and are
repeats punching operation. May oil and designated as Plumber Mate or Pipe Fitter
clean machine. Helper according to type of work done.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7126 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Plumbers and Pipe Fitters Code 7126
Title Plumbers and Pipe Fitters
7126.0600 Family 7127
Pneumatic Chipper Air Conditioning and Refrigeration
Mechanics
Pneumatic Chipper operates pneumatic
chipper and removes excess metal and
Air conditioning and refrigeration
scrapings from metal products and
mechanics assemble, install, maintain and
fixtures such as castings, fixtures, girders,
repair air conditioning and refrigeration
joints etc. Examines metal objects and
systems and equipment.
other structural assemblies and marks
areas with chalk requiring chipping of
7127.0100
excess metal or burrs to give smooth
Mechanic, Refrigeration and Air
finish. Connects air nozzle of pneumatic
chipper to high pressure air supply pipe. Conditioning
Fits cutting chisel or tool to chuck or
spindle or chipper as appropriate. Starts
VOLUME II B 64
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Mechanic Refrigeration and Air Painters, Builders, Structure
Conditioning Unit installs and repairs Cleaners and Related Trades
refrigeration or air conditioning plant by
Workers
replacing defective parts, re-seating
valves, refitting coils, insulting, requiring
Painters, building structure cleaners and
electrical connections, soldering etc.
related trades workers prepare surfaces
Installs at site assembled air conditioning
and apply paint and similar materials to
unit and refrigerators giving necessary
buildings and other structures, vehicles or
power connections and making changes
various manufactured articles. They cover
to units as necessary to attain desired
interior walls and ceilings with wallpaper,
results. Examines faulty equipment to
clean chimneys and exterior surfaces of
ascertain nature and location of defects.
buildings and other structures.
Dismantles equipment partly or
completely according to nature of defects
Occupations in this Group are classified
to remove damaged or worn out parts.
into the following Families:
Replaces or repairs defective parts.
Replaces or repairs defective parts to
7131 Painters and Related Workers
units by re-seating valves, refitting coils,
reinsulating system, etc. over hauls units 7132 Spray Painters and Varnishers
and reassembles them after cleaning 7133 Building Structure Cleaners
components and replacing defective or
Family 7131
worn out parts of pumps, compressors,
Painters and Related Workers
motors, etc., Removes faulty sealed units
or sub-units of refrigerators or air
Painters and related workers prepare
conditioning plants and obtains
surfaces of buildings and other structures
replacements. Conducts vacuum and
for painting, apply protective and
pressure test of pipe lines and charges
decorative coats of paint or similar
system with fresh refrigerant. Sets plant
materials, or cover interior walls and
to desired cooling conditions, prevents
ceilings of buildings with wallpaper or
leakage and ensures attainment and
other finishes.
maintenance of required temperature.
Gets burnt out motors or generators
7131.0100
repaired by Electrician or Electrical
Winder and installs repaired ones to plant Painter, Building
giving necessary electrical connections.
May work in ice factory, cold storage Painter, Building; Painter, House applies
plants, specialized air conditioning units or coats of paint, varnish and other similar
domestic refrigerators. material to protect or decorate exterior
and interior surface of buildings using
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: spray gun, hand brush, etc. Selects paint
Code 7127 materials. Mixes paints and matches
Title Air Conditioning and Refrigeration colours by stirring together proper
Mechanics proportions of pigment, oil, thinner etc.
and drying substances. Erects working
Group 713 scaffolding with bamboo poles and
wooden planks or positions ladders at
required height or places to be painted.
VOLUME II B 65
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Cleans surface packs, cracks and holes spray gun. Rigs up scaffolding, cradles,
with mud fillers or mortar to prepare it for ladders and other equipment as
painting. Applies prime coat and allows it necessary. Rubs and cleans metal surfaces
to dry. Brushes or sprays one or more to be painted with wire brush, coir or
coats of paint on surface to required other abrasive material to provide clean
finish. May finish and decorate surfaces smooth surface for painting. Stirs
with marble or brick and tile effects or by readymade paints in containers, mixes
building silvering, stencilling etc. turpentine with it for thinning and applies
it on metal surfaces with hand brush or
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: spray gun as provided. May mix paint with
Code 7131 linseed oil, colouring matter or other
Title Painters and Related Workers substances to obtain proper colour
consistency. May burn off old paint with
7131.0101 blow lamp and scrap surfaces before
painting with sand paper.
Assistant Painter and Decorator
Assistant Painter and Decorator in this
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
position need to work as semi-skilled
Code 7131
category tradesman and perform tasks
Title Painters and Related Workers
under instruction and close supervision of
Painter and Decorator Level-3. He is
7131.0300
expected to carry out shifting of materials,
handling tools and tackles mixing of Painter, Industrial
colours and paints. Including identification
and surface preparation and Painter, Industrial applies paint, varnish
housekeeping. He should ensure trade and similar materials to building and other
specific compliance to environment, structure. Chooses the right paint or finish
health and safety aspects. for the surface to be covered taking in to
account durability, ease of handling,
Qualification Pack Details: method of application and customers’
QP NOS Reference CON/Q0502 wishes. Prepares surface to be covered
QP NOS Name Assistant Painter using scrappers, abrasives, and chemical
and Decorator removers so that paint adheres properly.
NSQF Level 2 Removes old coat by stripping, sanding,
wire brushing, burning or watering and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: abrasive blasting. May wash surfaces and
do trimming to remove dirt and grease
Code 7131
from surfaces; fills holes and cracks;
Title Painters and Related Workers
welds; sand-papers rough spots and
brushes off dust. Applies primer on new
7131.0200
surfaces for the finish coat. Mixes paint
Painter, Steel Structure
and matches colours by stirring together
proper portions of pigments, oil, thinner
Painter, Steel Structure applies lead oxide,
etc. and other substances relying on
bituminous and other protective or
knowledge of paint composition and
decorative paints on steel framework of
colour harmony. Chooses the right paint
buildings, hangers, girders, bridges and
applicator for each job, depending on the
other steel structures with hand brush or
VOLUME II B 66
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
surface to be covered; characteristics of buildings with wallpapers, silk or other
the finish and other factors. May use fabrics not elsewhere classified.
brush with soft tapered edge, or paint
sprayer. Puts coating liquid in to spray gun ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
tank, couples gun to air hose and adjusts Code 7131
air pressure valves and nozzles when Title Painters and Related Workers
working with sprayer.
Family 7132
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Spray Painters and Varnishers
Code 7131
Title Painters and Related Workers
Spray Painters and Varnishers operate
spray painting and varnishing equipment
7131.0500
to apply protective coatings to
Paper Hanger/Wallpaper
manufactured items or structures.
Fixer/Decorator
7132.0100
Paper Hanger; Wall Paper Decorator cuts
Painter, General
wall paper to proper lengths, applies glue
paste on its back and covers walls and
Painter, General applies decorative or
ceilings with them for decorative
protective coats of paint, varnish, shellac,
purposes. Selects wall paper of suitable
enamel, lacquer or other materials on
colour, design and size and cuts it into
exterior or interior surfaces, trimming and
suitable lengths. Erects scaffolding or
fixtures of glass, metal, wood, plaster
positions ladder wherever necessary to
concrete brick, building boards or other
reach surface to be decorated. Applies
objects using brush, spray gun, roller,
coat of glue on back of paper and pastes it
stencils etc. Receives work order and
on surface to be covered. Trims edges and
selects correct type of paint materials
runs hard rubber over painted paper to
with the consideration to suitability,
smoothen it. May apply sticking material
durability, ease of application and
on surface with roller or brush.
estimated cost. Mixes pigments, oils and
other ingredients to material where
required by manual or mechanical mixing
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
device using paddle or electric mixer to
Code 7131
obtain desired colour, shade and
Title Painters and Related Workers
consistency. Removes dirt, grease or
rough spots and irregularities by scrapers,
7131.9900
chemicals and abrasives and patches
Painters and Related Workers, cracks and holes with putty or other filler.
Other Covers surface with appropriate prime
coat or sealer to have suitable surface or
Painters and Related Workers, other base for paint. Brushes, sprays or stencils
include those who prepare surfaces of one or more coats of material on surfaces.
buildings and other structures for May finish or decorate surfaces by gilding,
painting, apply protective and decorative silvering or painting over stencils. May be
coats of paints or similar materials or designated according to object coated or
cover interior walls and ceilings of material used. May mix paint with linseed
VOLUME II B 67
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
oil, colouring matter of materials, labour, Painter prepares body surfaces on motor
etc. May erect scaffolds to facilitate work. vehicles, and applies paint and other
coatings.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7132 Qualification Pack Details:
Title Spray Painters and Varnishers QP NOS Reference ASC/Q 1406
QP NOS Name Painter Level 4
7132.0201 NSQF Level 4
Painter, Spray/Painting Technician
(Spray Painting) ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7132
Painter Spray; Duco Painter applies Title Spray Painters and Varnishers
decorative or protective materials such as
paint, enamel or lacquer including 7132.0203
synthetic paint on articles of wood, metal Auto Body Painting Technician–
etc., using spray painting equipment. Surface Treatment
Selects and mixes paints to produce
desired colour consistency, strains and
Auto Body Painting Technician paints,
puts coating liquid into spray-gun tank,
does the touch up and inspection of the
couples gun to air-hose and adjusts air-
body. A Painting Technician does the final
pressure valves and nozzle. Presses trigger
painting, touch up and inspection of the
and directs spray of prime and finish coats
body of the vehicle being painted.
of paint over surfaces and ensures smooth
and even finish. Covers with tape areas
Qualification Pack Details:
not to be painted or where painting is to
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3303
be done in second colouring. Cleans gun
QP NOS Name Auto Body Painting
and hose with solvent before changing
Technician –L 3
colour and on completion of work. May
NSQF Level 3
prepare surfaces for painting, using
scrapers, abrasives, chemical removers or
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
other means. May be designated
Code 7132
according to article coated or material
Title Spray Painters and Varnishers
used.
7132.0204
Qualification Pack Details:
Automotive Body Painting
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0702
QP NOS Name Painting Technician Technician
(Spray Painting)
NSQF Level 2 Automotive Body Painting Technician
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: paints, does the touch up and inspection
Code 7132 of the
Title Spray Painters and Varnishers body. A Painting Technician does the final
painting, touch up and inspection of the
7132.0202 body of the vehicle being painted.
Auto Spray Painter/Painter
Qualification Pack Details:
VOLUME II B 68
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3304 pressure, and flow of oxygen and fuel
QP NOS Name Automotive Body indicated on dials to specifications
Painting Technician computed from data charts. Ignites gases
–L4 to melt wire and presses button or trigger
NSQF Level 4 to release compressed air, which atomises
and sprays molten metal onto work piece.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Directs spray over surface of work piece in
Code 7132 specified pattern to obtain coating of
Title Spray Painters and Varnishers required thickness as indicated by
electromagnetic gauge or amount of wire
7132.0205 used. May spray or brush paint or apply
sealing material on coated surface for
Auto Spray Painter
decoration or further protection. May
Assistant/Painter
flame-spray non-metallic objects, such as
glass or plastics.
Painter prepares body surfaces on motor
vehicles, and applies paint and other ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
coatings.
Code 7132
Title Spray Painters and Varnishers
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q 1407 7132.0400
QP NOS Name Painter Level 3
Painter, Sign and Letter
NSQF Level 3
Painter, Sign or Letter; Letter Writer; Sign
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Writer plans, lays out and paints in one or
Code 7132
more languages letters, signs, figures and
Title Spray Painters and Varnishers
monograms on wooden boards, metal
plates, walls etc. using pencil brushes and
7132.0300
palette. Prepares layout for sign writing,
Metal Sprayer coats back-ground with paint, using paint
Metal Sprayer controls portable flame brushes and allows it to dry. Sketches out
spray equipment to spray corrosion- lines with free hand in chalk or pencil or
resistant coatings, such as zinc or gets them marked by dusting on stencils.
aluminium, on objects, such as plates, Mixes paints and pigments to get desired
tanks, and structural shapes according to colour consistency and fills in marked out
specifications: Cleans and roughens lines of letters and designs with paint
surface of object to be coated, using using pencil brushes of various sizes. May
sandblasting equipment. Selects nozzle to make signs by cutting out and sticking
accommodate size of wire to be melted gold lead lettering to surfaces. May cut
and sprayed and screws nozzle into place stencils and paint signs by brushing and
on metallizing gun. Inserts wire into rear spraying paint over them. May make signs
of gun and through feed rollers and of metal or wood. May transfer designs
nozzle. Connects hoses from gun to air and monograms and to gliding, silvering,
compressor and tanks of oxygen and fuel graining etc.
gas, such as acetylene. Turns knobs to
synchronize speed of wire feed, air ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 69
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Code 7132 using hand brushes. Selects correct type
Title Spray Painters and Varnishers of paint materials or mixes pigment, oils
and other ingredients in proper
7132.0500 proportions to obtain desired colour,
Painter, Brush shade and consistency. Prepares surface
by scrapping with hand tools, rubbing with
abrasive papers such as sand paper, steel
Painter, Brush applies decorative or
wool or by applying chemicals to remove
protective materials such as paint,
dirt, grease stains and old paint. Fills
enamel, varnish, lacquer etc., on metal
cracks and holes with putty, honey wax or
articles, wood, building boards and other
filler and smoothens surface by rubbing
materials using hand brush. Selects
with cloth, brush or abrasives. Covers
correct type of paint and brush, taking
surface with enamel, lacquer, paint, stain
into consideration suitability, durability,
or varnish as required using hand brush
ease of application and cost or mixes
and allows coat to dry. Applies wax or
pigments, oils and other ingredients to
other polishing material with cloth and
paint material, as required, to obtain
rubs it to shin finish. May paint decorative
desired colour, shade and consistency.
designs and mix finishing materials to get
Cleans surfaces with brush, cloth or
desired effect.
abrasive material. Removes dirt, grease or
rough spots and irregularities by scrapers,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
chemicals etc. and patches cracks and
Code 7132
holes with putty or filler to provide
Title Spray Painters and Varnishers
smooth clean surface. Rubs or covers
surfaces with appropriate prime coat to
7132.0700
have suitable base or surface for painting.
Brushes with hand one or more coats of Painter, Glass
paint material on it to required finish.
Cleans brushes on completion of work and Painter, Glass paints ornamental and
maintains them. May be designated decorative designs on window glass and
according to object painted or material other glass articles using paints of
used. required colours and painting brushes.
Studies design or ornamental features and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: draws free hand out lines in chalk, pencil
Code 7132 or with special brush on glass planes or
Title Spray Painters and Varnishers other glass wares to be painted. Paints on
objects required design, using paints of
7132.0600 different colour to match design or
pattern. Paints details and shade on
Painter, Wood Work and Furniture
coloured glass previously waxed up
according to original pattern to complete
Painter, Wood Work and Furniture
design of windows used in churches,
polishes wood and applies decorative or
memorials and residences utilising
protective coats of materials such as
knowledge of art, portraiture and effect of
paints, enamel, varnish, lacquer etc., on
light and shade on glass. Cleans brushes in
pieces of furniture, mirror and picture
oil or solvent after painting. May estimate
frames, building fixtures and other types
cost of work. May paint walls, roof etc., of
of wood work to desired shade and colour
VOLUME II B 70
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
buildings. May stain back of painted glass QP NOS Name Automotive Paint
pieces with silver chloride to achieve gold Shop Assistant
effect. NSQF Level 2
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7132 Code 7132
Title Spray Painters and Varnishers Title Spray Painters and Varnishers
7132.0900 7132.9900
Painter, Mate Varnishers and Related Workers,
Other
Painter Mate; Painter Helper assists
painters in their wok by performing Varnishers and Related Painters, other
routine tasks such as cleaning and include all those who paint vehicles such
preparing surfaces, mixing paints or as cars, buses or trucks, or apply
colours under instructions, carrying tools protective coats of enamel or varnish on
and other equipment from one place to metal, wooden and other manufactured
another, supplying material to painters articles, usually with a hand-spraying
and assisting them in their work. Cleans device not elsewhere classified.
surfaces of object to be painted with
brush, cloth or abrasive material and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
removes grease and dirt with chemical Code 7132
solvents, patches cracks and holes with Title Spray Painters and Varnishers
putty or other filling and assists painter in
his work by supplying paint, brushes etc. Family 7133
as required. Keeps brushes and other
Building Structure Cleaners
painting equipment clean. May do brush
painting for ordinary purposes. May cover
Building structure cleaners clean exterior
surfaces with appropriate prime coat to
surfaces of buildings and other structures,
have suitable base for paint.
and remove soot from chimneys.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Sub Division 72
Code 7132
Title Spray Painters and Varnishers Metal, Machinery and Related
Trades Workers
7132.0901 Metal, machinery and related trades
Automotive Paint Shop Assistant workers cast, weld, forge and, by other
methods, form metal, erect, maintain and
Automotive Paint Shop Assistant will be repair heavy metal structures, engage in
involved in BIW Inspection, loading of the machine-tool setting as well as in fitting,
body in the conveyor and processes of maintaining and repairing machinery,
Sealing and sanding of the vehicle part. including engines, vehicles, or they
produce tools and various non-precious-
Qualification Pack Details: metal articles.
The work is carried out by hand and by
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3302
hand-powered and other tools which are
VOLUME II B 71
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
used to reduce the amount of physical and install, erect, maintain and repair
effort and time required for specific tasks, heavy metal structures, tackle, cable-cars
as well as to improve the quality of the and related equipment.
products. The tasks call for an
understanding of the work organization, Occupations in this Group are classified
the materials and tools used, and the into the following Families:
nature and purpose of the final product
Tasks performed by workers in this sub-
7211 Metal Moulders and Core Makers
major group usually include: making
7212 Welders and Flame Cutters
moulds and cores for casting metal;
7213 Sheet Metal Workers
casting, welding and shaping metal;
7214 Structural Metal Preparers and
installing, erecting, maintaining and
Erectors
repairing heavy metal structures, tackle
and related equipment; forging and 7215 Riggers and Cable Splicers
forming steel and other non-precious
metals to make and repair machinery,
Family 7211
tools, equipment and other articles;
Metal Moulders and Core Makers
setting for operators or setting and
operating various machine tools; fitting,
Metal Moulders and Coremakers make
maintaining and repairing industrial
moulds and cores for casting metal.
machinery, including engines and vehicles.
Supervision of other workers may be
included. 7211.0100
Moulder, General
Occupations in this Sub Division are
classified into the following Groups: Moulder, General prepares mould from
foundry sand using pattern for casting
721 Sheet and Structural Metal metal parts. Places pattern on mould
Workers, Moulders and Welders, plate (Wooden plate with arrangements
and Related Workers to hold pattern). Makes mould in two
halves (top and bottom) by ramming
722 Blacksmiths, Tool Makers and
foundry sand around the pattern.
Related Trades Workers
Removes pattern carefully and mends two
723 Machinery Mechanics and
halves of mould by trowel and smoothers.
Repairers
Makes vent holes by wire for escape of
gas and other holes on top box for
Group 721
pouring metal into mould and for escape
Sheet and Structural Metal of excess molten metal (runners and
Workers, Moulders and Welders, risers). Fixes dried cores in proper position
and Related Workers to have designed holes in casting. May
prepare bottom half of mould in floor
instead of in bottom box. May dry moulds
Sheet and structural metal workers,
by fire in case of heavy castings. May do
moulders and welders, and related
additions and alternations in mould from
workers, make moulds and cores for
drawing, using foot rule, knife and trowel.
casting metal, weld and cut metal parts,
May be known as PIPE MOULDER if
make and repair articles of sheet metal,
engaged in pipe moulding.
VOLUME II B 72
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7211 Code 7211
Title Metal Title Metal Moulders and Core Makers
Moulders and Core Makers
7211.0200
7211.0101 Moulder, Machine
Press Shop Operator
Moulder, Machine makes moulds for use
Press Shop Operator is involved in in forming molten metal into castings of
operating the press machine, overseeing various sizes, using auxiliary machines,
processes of blanking, drawing, etc., patterns, hand tools and sand or loam.
monitoring press operations and Places plate to which lower half of pattern
recording operational data, co-ordinating is attached on machine table. Fixes frame
with die setter during die setting having sides and cross-bars but no top or
operation and assisting in running the bottom to plate. Packs sand or loam
press at optimum efficiency. around pattern. Fills frame with coarser
material from chute or by shovelling, and
Qualification Pack Details: operates machine to ram material. Turns
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3402 frame over by hand or machine and dusts
QP NOS Name Press Shop surface of sand with powder. Fits upper
Operator Level 4 half of pattern to half and pins them
NSQF Level 4 together. Fixes another frame on top of
frame. Positions channels through which
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: molten metal will be poured and
observed. Repeats packing, filling and
Code 7211
ramming tasks and pierces holes to allow
Title Metal
gases to escape during and after pouring.
Moulders and Core Makers
Loosens frames and turns top frame over
and removes halves of pattern. Fits cores
7211.0102
in place. Repairs damaged surfaces and
Press Shop Assistant/Helper
treats all surfaces to prevent crumbling of
molten metal. Re-joins frames. Shapes
Helper Press Shop role involves minor
channel tops and fits bushes to protect
routine jobs like removing the scrap
them. May use only one frame and work
generated during the pressing operations
as member of team in preparing top or
(blanking, piercing, etc.), loading blanks
bottom frames. May specialize in casting
and unloading of work pieces on the press
any particular type of metal and be
line.
designated accordingly.
Qualification Pack Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3401
Code 7211
QP NOS Name Press Shop
Title Metal Moulders and Core Makers
Assistant/Helper
NSQF Level 2
7211.0201
Casting Technician-Sand Moulding
VOLUME II B 73
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Casting Technician-Sand Moulding spigot pattern on top; adjusts and sets
manages the specifications of the sand pattern with help of gauges and
and molten metal, setting up and completes ramming around spigot with
operating the casting equipment and pin rammers. Removes spigot and body
forming and finishing the final output. patterns carefully.
Qualification Pack Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3205 Code 7211
QP NOS Name Casting Technician- Title Metal Moulders and Core Makers
Sand Moulding
NSQF Level 4 7211.0500
Core Maker, Moulding (Hand)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7211 Core Maker, Moulding (Hand) prepares
Title Metal Moulders and Core Makers cores with core sand (foundry sand mixed
with some bonding agent such as
7211.0300 molasses) for casting cavities in metal
Moulder, Vertical Pipe parts. Sprays ash, silica or other non-
adhering powder on sides of core box,
partially fills box with core sand, and
Moulder, Vertical Pipe prepares mould for
inserts metal strengthening pins, wires
vertical casting heavy pipes. Sets bottom
(grid bars). Fills in and compacts more
socket in moulding box (casing) by
sand until core box is full. Makes vent
operating crane hoist. Gets ramming
holes in core with wire. Removes core
done, removes socket pattern and repairs
from core box, mends it if necessary and
mould after withdrawal of body pattern.
places it in oven for drying. May apply
Blackwashes mould and gets it dried up.
plumbago mixed with molasses and water
Sets socket core at bottom and gets main
to obtain smooth finish on finished
and top core lowered and placed securely
castings.
in concentric position. Is designated as
TOP MOULDER or BOTTOM MOULDER
according to location of work.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7211 Code 7211
Title Metal Moulders and Core Makers Title Metal Moulders and Core Makers
7211.0400 7211.0600
Rammer, Vertical Pipe Moulding Core Maker, Vertical Pipe
Core maker, Vertical Pipe prepares cores
Rammer, Vertical Pipe Moulding rams
for casting vertical pipes by repeated
foundry sand around body pattern and
process of loam application. Applies
sets core for preparation of vertical pipe
splash loam uniformly on metal body and
moulds. Directs other workers in lowering
covers it with straw roll mechanically.
and fitting it into bottom socket. Fills and
Applies protective loam over it, gets it
rams foundry sand in casing around body
dried up in gas fixed stoves and
pattern. Signals Crane Driver to lower
VOLUME II B 74
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
mechanically revolves it against core Welders and flame cutters weld and cut
board to get coating of fine loam. Sizes metal parts using gas flame, electric arc
core by mechanically scrapping off extra and other sources of heat to melt and cut,
material after drying. Cuts off bottom or to melt and fuse metal.
portion of core to prevent crushing during 7212.0100
operations. Repairs defects if any, applies Welder, Gas
thick coating of blackwash and gets it
dried up again before use.
Welder, Gas fuses metal parts together
using welding rod and oxygen acetylene
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
flame. Examines parts to be welded,
Code 7211 cleans portion to be joined, holds them
Title Metal Moulders and Core Makers together by some suitable device and if
necessary makes narrow groove to direct
7211.9900 flow of molten metal to strengthen joint.
Metal Moulders and Core Makers, Selects correct type and size of welding
Other rod, nozzle etc. and tests welding, torch.
Wears dark glasses and other protective
devices while welding. Releases and
Moulding and Core Making Operatives
regulates valves of oxygen and acetylene
perform number of routine and low skilled
cylinders to control their flow into torch.
tasks such as ramming foundry sand into
Ignites torch and regulates flame
mould by rammers (metal bars having flat
gradually. Guides flame along joint and
and round bottom), setting body pattern
heats it to melting point, simultaneously
with help of crane in centre of mould,
melting welding rod and spreading molten
fixing and removing of sockets for pipe
metal along joint shape, size etc. and
castings, setting pullers for withdrawing
rectifies defects if any. May join part at
machine castings, coating moulds with
various spots to prevent distortion of
refractory or insulating powder, assisting
shape, form dimension etc. May preheat
in preparation of foundry sand, making
materials like cast iron prior to welding.
bed for moulds, checking conditions of
May also weld by other gases such as
moulds, skimming dirt and slag from
argon coal etc.
molten metal, cleaning and blackening
trough, guiding and assisting Crane Driver
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
in stripping castings from metal moulds,
etc., and may be designated as Rammer, Code 7212
Socket Putter, Moulder Mates, Moulder Title Welders and Flame Cutters
Helpers, Pitman, Skimmer, Troughman,
Stripper, etc. 7212.0101
Plumber (Welder)/Plumbing
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: (Sanitary Fixtures) Fitter Assistant
Code 7211
Title Metal Moulders and Core Makers Plumber (Welder) is responsible for
welding activities related to plumbing
works in housing, commercial and
Family 7212 institutional setups.
Welders and Flame Cutters Qualification Pack Details:
VOLUME II B 75
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0105 QP NOS Name Iron & Steel
QP NOS Name Plumber (Welder) (Tungsten Inert Gas
NSQF Level 3 Welder)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: NSQF Level 4
Code 7212
Title Welders and Flame Cutters ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7212
7212.0102 Title Welders and Flame Cutters
Plumber (Welder) Assistant
7212.0111
Repair Welder
Plumber (Welder) Assistant is responsible
for assistance in welding activities related
to plumbing works in housing, commercial Repair Welder is responsible for
and institutional setups. maintaining and operating all welding
related works. The individual must be able
Qualification Pack Details: to use hand welding techniques or
QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0103 welding equipment and tools to join
QP NOS Name Plumber (Welder) various metal components and also carry
Assistant out repair work on machinery and
NSQF Level 2 equipment.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Qualification Pack Details:
Code 7212 QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1902
Title Welders and Flame Cutters QP NOS Name Repair Welder
NSQF Level 4
7212.0105
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Iron and Steel (Tungsten Inert Gas
Code 7212
Welder)
Title Welders and Flame Cutters
Iron and Steel (Tungsten Inert Gas
7212.0200
Welder) performs manual TIG (GTAW)
Welder, Electric
welding for a range of standard welding
job requirements. This is for skilled welder
who can weld different materials (carbon Welder, Electric Arc Welder fuses metals
steel, aluminium, nickel, titanium, copper using arc-welding apparatus and
and stainless steel) in various positions electrodes (welding material). Examines
and prepare various joints including parts to be welded, cleans them and sets
corner, butt, fillet and tee. Set-up and joints together with clamps or any other
prepare for operations interpreting the suitable device. Starts generator or
right information from the WPS. transformer (welding apparatus and
regulates current according to material
Qualification Pack Details: and thickness of welding. Clamps one lead
(insulated wire carrying current from
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0807
generator) to part to be welded, selects
required type of electrode and clamps it
to holder connected with other lead).
VOLUME II B 76
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Generates sparks between electrode and Arc Welding (MIG, MAG, TIG), Resistance
joint, simultaneously guiding and Welding (Spot Welding, Projection
depositing melting electrode uniformly for Welding, Butt Welding) and Automatic or
welding. Takes precautionary measures Robotic Welding Process. This role is
such as wearing rubber gloves, holding responsible for joining various types of
welding screen of dark glass etc. May join metallic frames, structures, jigs, plates,
parts first at various points for holding at sheets etc. using heating and melting
specified angles, shape, form and process created through electrical power
dimension. and gaseous discharge, maintaining
process parameters, conducting quality
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: checks on output product and maintaining
Code 7212 a safe and healthy working environment
Title Welders and Flame Cutters on the shop floor.
7212.0300 Qualification Pack Details:
Welder, Machine QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3103
QP NOS Name Welder Level 4
NSQF Level 4
Welder, Machine operates gas or electric
welding machine to joint metal parts by
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
fusion. Sets machine for operation by
igniting burners and adjusting flames or Code 7212
by switching on current. Regulates flow of Title Welders and Flame Cutters
gas or current and adjusts machine
according to material to be welded. 7212.0302
Checks cooling system and adjusts Welding Technician
movement of conveyor, if any. Feeds
material to be welded with either one by Welding Technician, this role is similar for
one or in batch according to type of all types of joining techniques like Gas
machine and welds them by pressing Discharge Arc Welding (MIG, MAG, TIG),
paddle, or by automatic arrangements. Resistance Welding (Spot Welding,
May use fixtures or other suitable devices Projection Welding, Butt Welding) and
for mass production work. Is designated Automatic or Robotic Welding Process.
as SPOT WELDER, FLASH WELDER, etc. This role is responsible for joining various
according to machine and type of work types of metallic frames, structures, jigs,
done. plates, sheets etc. using heating and
melting process created through electrical
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: power and gaseous discharge, maintaining
Code 7212 process parameters, conducting quality
Title Welders and Flame Cutters checks on output product and maintaining
a safe and healthy working environment
7212.0301 on the shop floor.
Welder
Qualification Pack Details:
Welder is also known as Welding QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3102
Technician, this role is similar for all types QP NOS Name Welding Technician
of joining techniques like Gas Discharge Level 3
VOLUME II B 77
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
NSQF Level 3 to instruction of specification. Mounts
template and sets machine to cut to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: specifications. Makes necessary
Code 7212 connections and fits required size of
Title Welders and Flame Cutters nozzle or burner in welding torch.
Releases and regulates flow of gas in
nozzle or burner, ignites and adjusts
7212.0303 flame. Guides flame by hand or machine
along cutting line at required speed and
Gas Metal Arc Welder/Metal Inert
cuts metal to required size. May use
Gas/Metal Active Gas/Gas Metal
oxyacetylene or any other appropriate gas
Arc Welder (MIG/MAG/GMAW)
flame.
Metal Inert Gas/Metal Active Gas/Gas ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Metal Arc Welder (MIG/MAG/GMAW) Code 7212
perform manual (semi-automatic) Title Welders and Flame Cutters
MIG/MAG (GMAW) welding for a range of
standard welding job requirements and 7212.0402
weld different materials (carbon steel,
Iron and Steel Plasma Cutter-
aluminium and stainless steel) in various
Manual
positions. The welder can prepare various
joints including corner, butt, fillet and tee.
Iron and Steel Plasma Cutter-Manual cuts
Set-up and prepare for operations
different materials (mild carbon steel,
interpreting the right information from
stainless steel, aluminium, high tensile
the WPS.
and special steels, and other materials) in
various profiles. This involve setting-up
Qualification Pack Details:
and preparing operations interpreting the
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0209
right information from the specification
QP NOS Name Metal Inert
documents, obtaining the right
Gas/Metal Active
consumables and other materials, etc.
Gas/Gas Metal Arc
Welder
Qualification Pack Details:
(MIG/MAG/GMAW)
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0806
NSQF Level 4
QP NOS Name Iron & Steel Plasma
Cutter
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
NSQF Level 4
Code 7212
Title Welders and Flame Cutters
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7212
7212.0400
Title Welders and Flame Cutters
Gas Cutter
7212.0500
Gas Cutter; Flame Cutter cuts metal to
Brazer
required shape and size by gas flame
either manually or by machine. Examines
material to be cut and marks it according
VOLUME II B 78
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Brazer fuses metal parts by heating using levels edges of sections to be joined. Fits
flux and fillings. Cleans and fastens parts section into place and fuses section
to be joined face to face by wire, by together by moving flame of lamp along
seaming or by any other suitable means joints or by heating joints with lamp and
and prepares paste of flux and fillings. adding lead from rod or ladle. Makes lead
Applies it to joint and hearts in furnace or fittings and pipes by cutting, shaping and
by torch to melt filling into joint. Allows it joining. May fuse, cut or make lead parts
to cool down. Examines joint and cleans of storage battery, tanks, etc. by operating
them by filing, buffing etc. bad burning machine, or using
oxyacetylene or oxyhydrogen torch.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7212 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Welders and Flame Cutters Code 7212
Title Welders and Flame Cutters
7212.0501
Soldering and Brazing Operator 7212.0700
Welder, Resistance
Soldering and Brazing Operator is
responsible for joining various types of Welder, Resistance sets up and operates
metallic frames, structures, jigs, plates, resistance welding machine to join metal
sheets, wires etc. using heating and parts, according to blueprints, work
melting process created through electrical orders, or oral instructions. Turns machine
power and gaseous discharge, maintaining dials to set air and hydraulic pressure,
process parameters, conducting quality amperage, and joining time, according to
checks on output product and maintaining specified type of metal, weld, and
a safe and healthy working environment assembly. May select, install, and adjust
on the shop floor. electrodes. Aligns work pieces, using
square and rule. May hold pieces together
Qualification Pack Details: manually, fasten into jigs, or secure with
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q4201 clamps to align in specified assembly
QP NOS Name Soldering and position. Holds part between electrodes
Brazing Operator or positions on machine worktable.
NSQF Level 4 Depresses pedal or pulls trigger to close
electrodes and form weld at point of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: contact. Releases pedal or trigger after
specified welding time. Cleans electrodes,
Code
using file, tip dresser, emery cloth. May
Title
operate machine which automatically
releases electrodes from metal after
7212.0600
welding cycle. May devise and build
Lead Burner
fixtures to hold pieces. May inspect
finished work. May operate machine
Lead Burner installs and repairs lead
equipped with two or more electrodes
tanks, tank lining, pipes, floors and other
which weld at several points
fixtures and equipment of lead, using
simultaneously. Important variations
blow lamp and hand tools. Cuts section of
include types of joints welded (seam,
sheet lead or pipe to size. Scrapes and
VOLUME II B 79
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
spot, butt) and types of materials welded Title Welders and Flame Cutters
(aluminium, steel). Family 7213
Sheet Metal Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7212
Sheet metal workers make, install and
Title Welders and Flame Cutters
repair articles and parts of articles made
out of sheet metal such as sheet steel,
7212.0801
copper, tin, brass, aluminium, zinc or
Welding Assistant galvanised iron.
Welding Assistant, also known as Welding 7213.0101
Helper is an assistant to the operator and
Sheet Metal Worker,
the entire team, the helper supports
General/Sheet Metal Worker –
peripheral activities/non-core activities in
Hand Tools and Manually Operated
the manufacturing process. The Helper’s
role is involved in performing small time Machines
routine jobs like cleaning, washing,
fetching and holding tool for the Sheet Metal Worker, General makes sheet
operators, loading and unloading of work metal articles according to drawing or
pieces on the welding assembly, bringing sample. Studies drawing or sample and
raw material and spare parts from the records measurements if necessary.
stores etc. Selects sheet of required type, thickness
(gauge) and size and marks it with scriber,
Qualification Pack Details: square, divider, foot rule etc., according to
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3101 drawing or sample. Shears wherever
QP NOS Name Welding Assistant necessary by machine or hand shears and
NSQF Level 2 makes it to required shape and size by
bending, seaming, forming, riveting,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: soldering etc., using mallets, hammers,
Code 7212 formers, sets, stakes, etc., or by various
Title Welders and Flame Cutters machines such as shearing, bending,
beading, channelling, circle cutting.
7212.9900 Checks work at stages during operations
and does soldering, brazing as necessary.
Welders and Flame Cutters, Other
May undertake pneumatic and hydraulic
tests. May also undertake repair work.
Welders and Flame Cutters, other perform
May specialize in different metal sheets
number of routine and low skilled tasks
such as tin, copper, brass.
such as cleaning joints, fitting. electrodes,
relieving welder and flame cutters in
Qualification Pack Details:
minor operations, fitting nozzle or burner,
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0301
fitting templates etc. and is designated as
QP NOS Name Sheet Metal Worker
Welder Helper, Gas Cutter Helper, etc.
– Hand Tools and
Manually Operated
Machines
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
NSQF Level 2
Code 7212
VOLUME II B 80
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1409
Code 7213 QP NOS Name Auto Engine Repair
Title Sheet Metal Workers Technician
NSQF Level 4
7213.0200
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Sheet Metal Worker, Structural
Code 7213
Title Sheet Metal Workers
Sheet Metal Worker, Structural
assembles, alters and repairs
7213.0301
prefabricated sheet metal sections
according to specifications by various Dent Remover/Auto Body Repair
mechanical processes such as drilling, Technician/Denter
riveting, trimming, soldering etc. to form
body structures of motor vehicles, Dent Remover; Panel Beater removes
aircraft, water tanks etc. Studies drawings dents from sheet metal parts such as
and other specifications. Selects mudguards, body panels, tanks,
prefabricated metal sheet of required size, containers, trunks by beating with mallets,
shape, form and thickness, measures smoothens surface for painting and other
them and marks outline and positions to operations. Gets parts dismantled,
indicate joints, bends etc. Punches or drills examines dents caused by stress or
holes in metal sheets at marked points accidents and starts beating from highest
with hand or tools and joins various parts point on inner side with mallet to bring it
together by riveting, soldering, welding or back to original shape. Supports outer
with nuts and bolts. Bends metal sheet to surface with soft metal-piece, wood or
required shape and covers it by joining it broader mallet to avoid distortion in
with frame at suitable places with nuts reverse direction. Manipulates support
and bolts. Trims ends of bent metallic and uniformly beats inner portion till
sheet by filing, sawing, bending etc. as damaged portion is reformed to original
appropriate. May install assembled body shape. May engage an assistant to hold
structure on frames for having wooden support and guide him in manipulating it.
parts fitted to it. May heat and bend May also scrape or lightly file outer
metallic parts of frame. May do spot surface to remove further defects, if any,
welding. for obtaining finer finish.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Qualification Pack Details:
Code 7213 QP NOS Reference ASC/Q 1410
Title Sheet Metal Workers QP NOS Name Auto Body Repair
Technician/Denter
7213.0201 Level 3
Auto Engine Repair Technician NSQF Level 3
Auto Engine Repair Technician is ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
responsible for the repair of vehicle Code 7213
engines and aggregates. Title Sheet Metal Workers
7213.0302
Qualification Pack Details: Auto Body Technician/Denter
VOLUME II B 81
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
domestic use. Makes small charcoal fire,
Auto Body Technician is responsible for cleans (degreases) utensils by scribbling
repair of vehicles and for carrying out with dry sand or any other such abrasive,
work on the body and frame of a vehicle heats up utensils on fire, sprinkles
following the manufacturer’s repair powdered ammonium chloride and tin
procedures. stick or powdered tin on it, allows tin to
melt and spreads melted tin over entire
Qualification Pack Details: required surface with cotton or wool pad.
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q 1405 Repeats and again rubs coated surface to
QP NOS Name Auto Body ensure smooth finish.
Technician/Denter
Level 4 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
NSQF Level 4 Code 7213
Title Sheet Metal Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7213 7213.0600
Title Sheet Metal Workers Machine Feeder and Off bearer
7213.0400
Tinsmith/Whitesmith Machine Feeder and Off bearer feeds
materials into or removes materials from
Tinsmith makes and repairs cart-lamps. machines or equipment that is automatic
Containers, funnels, oil cans, siphons etc., or tended by other workers. Feeds
from thin mild steel, galvanized or other materials into machines and equipment to
sheets according to samples or process and manufacture products. Off
instructions for commercial and domestic bears materials and products from
use. Measures sample with foot rule and machines and equipment, using hand
callipers, selects required type of metal tools. Cleans and maintains machinery,
sheet, marks and cuts it accordingly with equipment, and work areas to ensure
hand scissors. Develops sheet to required proper functioning and safe working
shape by beating and bending using conditions. Moves controls to start, stop,
mallet, rods, patterns, rails, stakes, etc., or adjust machinery and equipment.
and solders joints as required. Secures Modifies materials and products during
joints by seaming or riveting and tests manufacturing process to meet
them for leakage. May be designated as requirements. Records production and
COPPER-SMITH, BRASS-SMITH etc., operational information and data on
according to material in which worked. specified forms. Identifies and marks
materials, products, and samples,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: following instructions. Weighs or
measures materials or products to ensure
Code 7213
conformance to specifications. Inspects
Title Sheet Metal Workers
materials and products for defects and to
ensure conformance to specifications.
7213.0500
Fastens, packages, or stacks materials and
Tin Coater
products, using hand tools and fastening
equipment.
Tin Coater; Kalaigare applies thin coating
of tin on brass and copper utensils for
VOLUME II B 82
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Boiler Fitter
Code 7213
Title Sheet Metal Workers Boiler Fitter sizes and fits various
components and mountings to boilers and
7213.9900 assists Boiler Maker in preparing boilers
Sheet Metal Workers, Other for steam and hydraulic tests. Marks
components according to drawings and
sizes them accurately by chipping, filing,
Sheet Metal Workers, Other perform
drilling, reaming, tapping, scrapping etc.
number of routine and low skilled tasks,
to required specifications, checking
such as doing primary development of
frequently with precision measuring
sheet metal, cutting sheets to sizes,
instruments. Locates carefully position of
assisting in operating sheet metal
different mountings such as regulator,
machines, applying brazing compound on
super heater, header, pressure gauge,
joints to be brazed, heating rivets for
seating, safety valve by measuring
assembly etc. and are designated as:
instruments and gauges and fits them on
Sheet Metal Helper if assists Sheet Metal
boiler. Fits external water and lubrication
Worker by performing simple flanging,
pipes. Performs various duties as
punching, shearing soldering etc. for
instructed by Boiler Maker such as
fabrication of sheet metal products, Tin
cleaning of pipes, connecting pump,
Smith Helper if cuts tin sheets according
sealing etc. and assists him in preparing
to drawing or sample using foot rule,
boiler for hydraulic and steam tests. May
callipers and compass and assists Tin
also undertake riveting, caulking,
Smith in bending, shaping and joining
replacing of worn out and defective parts.
various component parts. Sheet Metal
Machine Helper if assists Sheet Metal
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Machine Operator in setting and
operating sheet metal working machines Code 7214
such as bending machine, channelling Title Structural Metal Preparers and
machine, shearing machine etc. Erectors
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 7214.0400
Code 7213 Tubesmith, Boiler
Title Sheet Metal Workers
Tubesmith, Boiler forms, repairs and
Family 7214 maintains boiler tubes, cuts tubes to
required length, grinds surfaces, reams
Structural Metal Preparers and holes, expands or reduces ends and
swages them as required. Repairs or
Erectors
replaces defective or worn out tubes and
tests for leakage by hydraulic pressure.
Structural metal preparers and erectors
May do descaling and cleaning of boiler
assemble, erect and dismantle structural
tubes.
metal frames of buildings and other
structures.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7214
7214.0300
VOLUME II B 83
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Structural Metal Preparers and kinds of lifting tackles, men, etc., required.
Erectors Collects steel members such as truss,
rafter, posts, etc., sets up hoisting
7214.0500 equipment for raising and placing them
Boiler Maker and erects scaffolding. Aligns and bolts
members in position for riveting. Drills,
reams or enlarges holes and smoothens
Boiler Maker makes layout of boiler from
rough surfaces using pneumatic or electric
drawings, fits and assembles different
tools, gets fabricated members slinged
parts, adjusts valves, prepares boiler for
and lifted using lifting tackles, ropes,
steam and hydraulic tests and undertakes
chains, crane etc. as necessary, structural
repairs of boilers. Studies drawing, sets
steel places them according to
barrel of boiler in position, marks out
specifications and joins them permanently
locations and fits different units such as
in order of sequence to form completed
stays, flue tubes with super heater,
structure or its frame work. May rivet or
header, thermo-siphon, injection and
weld members together.
external pipes, fire grate, ash pan, smoke
box tube plate, junction rings, etc. Repairs
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and replaces tubes, stays, grates etc. as
and when required. Expands tubes and Code 7214
adjusts valves and other functional parts Title Structural Metal Preparers and
of boiler. Does riveting, caulking reaming, Erectors
beading etc. as required by pneumatic,
hydraulic and mechanical devices. Checks 7214.0700
components, fittings, mountings etc. and Fitter, Structural
prepares boiler for inspection at different
stages and also for hydraulic and steam Fitter Structural assembles and fits
tests. May assemble tanks, vats and other together various parts of heavy structures
heavy steel vessels with prefabricated such as bridges, overhead cranes, hoists,
parts. May also alter boiler parts and ship etc. in workshop according to
repair pumps, pipe lines etc. drawings under instructions of structural
Engineer, and dismantles them for
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: transporting to site for final construction.
Code 7214 Examines drawings and other
Title Structural Metal Preparers and specifications. Checks parts to be fitted
Erectors together. Cuts steel plates and angle iron
using power shear or flame cutting
7214.0600 equipment. Drills holes for bolts and
Erector, Structural rivets. Aligns members in position with
connecting pins to ensure that members
fit together properly preparatory to
Erector, Structural; Erection Fitter,
permanent erection of structures at site.
Structural erects iron and steel framework
Checks alignment of members with spirit
at site for construction of buildings,
level, etc., to ensure accuracy of fit.
bridges, chimneys, drilling rise, ropeways,
Dismantles parts of assembled structures
etc., under guidance of structural
to facilitate transportation to site. May
Engineer. Examines drawings, site facilities
bend or otherwise shape plates and
and other specifications to determine
VOLUME II B 84
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
assemble structural members by fitting, required shape by manual or mechanical
forging, drilling, riveting, bolting, or process. Checks and ensures that rivets
welding. are not loose or bent and heads have
been correctly formed. May detect faulty
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: rivets, and drive them out after chipping
Code 7214 or sawing riverheads. Reams rivet holes
Title Structural Metal Preparers and manually or by drilling machine, if
Erectors necessary, and fixes new rivets. Is
designated as CAULKER if engaged in
7214.0800 caulking seams, stays, rivets etc. with
caulking tools. May also do beading.
Fitter, Construction
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Fitter, Construction erects columns,
Code 7214
trusses and general fabrication work at
Title Structural Metal Preparers and
site for construction of buildings, heavy
Erectors
foundations, hangars, sheds, etc. under
guidance of Civil Engineer or Overseer.
7214.1000
Examines drawings and other
specifications. Selects rods and cuts them Riveter (Railroad Equipment)
to required length. Bends rods using hand
tools or bending machine and joins them Riveter (Railroad Equipment) rivets
together with wires or fasteners. Places structural members, assemblies, and parts
rods in forms and fixes them in position. of railroad cars, using portable riveting,
May reinforce concrete with wire mesh. dimpling, and drilling machines and hand
tools: Reads work orders, blueprints, and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: operation sheets to determine sequence
Code 7214 of operations and type size and hole
Title Structural Metal Preparers and pattern of rivets. Removes temporary
Erectors bolts or fasteners and inserts rivets in
predrilled holes. Places drive head of rivet
7214.0900 gun against rivet shank and pulls trigger to
Riveter actuate hammer that spreads rivet, or
spreads rivet, using rivet set and hammer.
Rivets together adjoining edges of parts
Riveter joins permanently metal parts,
and assemblies, using portable rivet
plates etc. with rivets either manually or
squeezer. Places two dies of rivet
by pneumatic or hydraulic machines.
squeezer overhead and shank of rivet, and
Selects correct size and type of rivets.
presses trigger to activate dies that flatten
Ensures by sight or calculation that rivets
shank of rivet. Drills and reams rivet holes
are of correct length including allowances
and drills out defective rivets. Forms
for riveting and cuts them if required, to
dimples around rivet holes, using portable
correct length. Gets them heated up by
dimpling gun or stationary dimpling
Riveter Helper if necessary. Sets parts or
machine. May align and assemble parts to
plates in correct position, aligns holes and
be riveted, using jigs, holding fixtures,
inserts rivets. Directs Dolly Man to hold
pins, clamps, and fasteners. May buck
dolly in position or holds it by suitable
rivets.
mechanical device and snaps other end to
VOLUME II B 85
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Structural Metal Preparers and
Code 7214 Erectors
Title Structural Metal Preparers and
Erectors Family 7215
Riggers and Cable Splicers
7214.1101
Assistant Bar Bender and Fixer Riggers and cable splicers assemble
rigging gear to move and position
Assistant Bar Bender and Fixer works as equipment and structural components, or
semi‐skilled category tradesman and install and maintain cables, ropes and
perform tasks under instruction and close wires on construction sites, buildings or
supervision of Bar Bender and Fixer Level‐ other structures.
3 as Assistant Bar Bender and Fixer. He is
expected to read and understand 7215.0100
drawings, Bar Bending schedule, fabricate,
Rigger
store, transport and place reinforcement
in position while effectively engaging and
Rigger erects lifting and hauling tackles,
supervising the Helper under him for all
pulleys, wire ropes, etc. to lift, move or
trade relevant tasks. He should ensure
lower heavy articles such as girders,
trade specific compliance to environment,
beams, roofing sheets, machinery, logs,
health and safety aspects.
etc. for building, erection, construction or
similar purposes. Selects cables, ropes,
Qualification Pack Details:
pulleys, winches, blocks, and sheaves,
QP NOS Reference CON/Q0202
according to weight and size of load to be
QP NOS Name Assistant Bar
moved; attaches pulley and blocks to fixed
Bender and Fixer
overhead structures, such as beams,
NSQF Level 2
ceilings and pole booms, with bolts and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
clamps; attaches load with grappling
Code 7214 devices, such as loops, wires, ropes and
Title Structural Metal Preparers and chains, to crane hook; gives directions to
Erectors Electric Bridge or Gantry Crane Operator
or other Hoist Operator engaged in
7214.9900 hoisting and moving loads to insure safety
Structural Metal Prepares and of workmen and material handled using
Erectors, Other hand signals, loud speaker, or telephone.
May splice rope and wire cables to make
or repair slings and tackle. May direct
Structural-metal Preparers and Erectors,
workers engaged in hoisting machinery
other include workers who shape,
and equipment into ships and be
assemble and erect heavy metal girders
designated MACHINERY ERECTOR (Ship
and plates to form structures and frame-
and boat building and repair). When
works not elsewhere classified.
hoisting and moving construction
machinery onto truck beds, may be
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
designated as MACHINE MOVER
Code 7214
(Construction).
VOLUME II B 86
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: pulls lever crane or shovel with grease gun
Code 7215 or oil can. May be designated according to
Title Riggers and Cable Splicers equipment used, attachments made or
area worked, as CONCRETE BUCKET
7215.0101 HOOKER (CONSTRUCTION) LOG HOOKERS
(SAWMILL), MAGNET PLACER (IRON AND
Rigger: Rigging of Heavy Material
STEEL).
Rigger: Rigging of Heavy Material selects
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
tools and tackles, understanding and
Code 7215
analysis of load distribution and lifting,
Title Riggers and Cable Splicers
moving (to be tied with manila rope to
arrest lateral movement of loads safely as
7215.0300
per needs of the group (Fitter, Welder
etc.) Splicer (Rope and Cables)
Qualification Pack Details: Splicer (Rope and Cables) joins, repairs or
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0817 fits attachments to wire or hemp ropes or
QP NOS Name Rigger: Rigging of cables by splicing. Cuts parts of damaged
Heavy Material cables; joins cables by opening up ends
NSQF Level 3 and interweaving strands, fits cables
around hooks, eyes or other attachments
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and splices end of cable back into itself;
binds joints and ends of cables. May be
Code 7215
designated according to type of cables
Title Riggers and Cable Splicers
spliced.
7215.0200
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Slinger
Code 7215
Title Riggers and Cable Splicers
Slinger Crane Hooker assists workers
engaged in operating power shovels or
7215.9900
cranes used to lift and move machinery
Riggers and Cable Splicers, Other
equipment or materials such as concrete,
castings, mill rolls, scrap metal, pipe, dirt
and logs from one place to another. Riggers and Cable Splicers, Other include
Affixes rope, cable, chain, sling or other all other workers engaged in splicing
grappling equipment or attachments to cables and rigging and material handling
object being lifted or to lifting mechanism; equipment, not elsewhere classified.
places blocking or screw jacks in position ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to hold crane or shovel upright when Code 7215
lifting heavy loads; signals operator, Title Riggers and Cable Splicers
vocally or with hand signals, to guide
operator in lifting and moving loads when
view from crane or shovel cab is Group 722
obstructed; pushes or pulls load as it is Blacksmiths, Tool Makers and
lowered until it is deposited in desired
Related Trades Workers
place; removes grappling attachments or
VOLUME II B 87
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Blacksmiths, Toolmakers and Related two pieces with brass and borax by
Trades Workers, hammer and forge bars, heating), and work by cold process. Is
rods or ingots of iron, steel and other designated as ANGLESMITH OR SPRING
metals to make and repair various kinds of SMITH if specialized in working on angle
tools, equipment and other articles, set iron or in making springs.
machine tools for operators or set and
operate various machine tools, and polish ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and sharpen surfaces. Code 7221
Title Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and
Occupations in this Group are classified Forging Press Workers
into the following Families:
7221.0200
7221 Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and Village Blacksmith
Forging Press Workers
7222 Tool Makers and Related Workers
Village Blacksmith forges domestic and
7223 Metal Working Machine Tool agricultural articles, used in villages, by
Setters and Operators repeated heating and hammering.
7224 Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders Examines sample for shape and size.
and Tool Sharpeners Heats specified type and length of metal
in furnace to required degree of
temperature. Places and holds it on anvil
Family 7221
with tongs and gets it hammered or
Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and
hammers it to desired shape and size
Forging Press Workers
using sets, swages, etc. Punches holes by
heating and hammering. Joins pieces of
Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and forging ferrous metal by forge-welding (heating
press workers hammer and forge bars, two pieces of steel or iron and hammering
rods, ingots and plates of iron, steel or them together). Heats articles frequently
other metals, and draw wire to make and and checks it by sight or with scale,
repair various kinds of tools, metal callipers etc., while forging. May fit metal
articles, pieces of equipment, and tyres on cart wheels. May do simple heat
agricultural and related implements. treatment operations. May also make
articles according to instructions.
7221.0100
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Blacksmith
Code 7221
Title Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and
Blacksmith; Lohar forges metal to
Forging Press Workers
required shape and size by processes of
heating, bending, hammering etc. Heats
7221.0300
metal in furnace to required degree of
temperature. Places it on anvil holding it Power Hammer Operator
with tongs and forges it to required shape
and size by hammering either themselves Power Hammer Operator; Forging
or by Hammerman. May use swages, sets Machine Operator forges iron or steel to
from tools, jigs, etc. according to shape required dimensions by heating and
required. May weld by forging (joining hammering with power hammer. Heats
VOLUME II B 88
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
metal red hot and adjusts it below ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
hammer on anvil with tongs. Holds it Code 7221
firmly with tongs and operates hammer Title Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and
by paddle or signals to Lever Man to Forging Press Workers
operate power hammer with required
force and momentum. Turns sides of 7221.0500
metal by tongs for hammering according
Stamper/Forging Operator
to requirements. May heat or get metal
heated number of times according to
Stamper; Drop Forger shapes articles from
necessity. May finish article by striking it
metal pieces by using dies and drop
with a hand hammer.
forging or stamping machine. Sets
required die and punch securely in
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine, heats metal to red hot and
Code 7221
firmly places it on die holding it with long
Title Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and
tongs. Signals Stamper, Helper to bring
Forging Press Workers
punch down with force. Checks formation
by sight and adjusts position of material
7221.0301
every time before strike. Applies oil, saw
Forging Operator dust or powdered coal on die before
stamping. May reheat and handle more
Forging Operator manages the than one set of die for completing article.
specifications of the metal bars, setting up May also work by cold process in case of
and operating the machinery for forging hammer dies and metal sheets.
and producing the output in line with the
desired specifications. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7221
Qualification Pack Details: Title Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q4501 Forging Press Workers
QP NOS Name Forging Operator
NSQF Level 4 7221.0600
Farrier
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7221 Farrier fits iron shoes to hoofs of animals
Title Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and such as bullocks, horses, etc., to protect
Forging Press Workers them from injury and excessive wear and
tear. Removes old shoes and nails from
7221.0400 hoofs of animals and dresses them (hoofs)
Hammer Man by mending and filing. Selects shoes of
required size, rectifies defects if any, and
Hammerman; Striker hammers iron and fits them in hoofs with special types of
steel to required dimension with sledges nails. Ensures that shoes are not loose and
according to direction of Blacksmith. animal does not get injured in process of
Selects sledge according to nature of fitting shoes. Ties and immobilises animal
forging and strikes hot metal hard or light before fitting shoes if necessary. May also
as per direction of Blacksmith. May also make shoes by common blacksmithy
work by cold process. process.
VOLUME II B 89
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: removes completed article from lathe and
Code 7221 repeats process. Smoothens and trims
Title Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and spun piece with hand tools. May oil and
Forging Press Workers clean machine. May work on wood
turning lathe and make wooden chucks or
7221.0700 moulds. May cut and prepare appropriate
sizes of metal blanks on machine for use
Wire Drawer/Wire Drawing
of spinning lathe. May be designated as
Machine Operator
ALUMINIUM SPINNER, BRASS SPINNER,
and COPPER SPINNER, according to type
Wire Drawer; Block Stripper, Metal
of metal handled.
Drawing draws wire through dies to
required specification by operating wire
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
drawing machine. Selects required die and
Code 7221
fits it in die box. Sets height and alignment
Title Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and
of block. Points one end of wire, feed it
Forging Press Workers
into die, starts machine and watches
drawing and coiling at other end. Rectifies
7221.9900
defects in case of faulty drawing or
Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and
breakage.
Forging Press Workers, Other
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Blacksmiths, Hammer-smiths and Forging-
Code 7221 press Workers, other perform variety of
Title Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and routine and low skilled tasks not
Forging Press Workers elsewhere classified, in smithy section
such as operating levers of power
7221.0800 hammer, pulling string of drop forging
machine, assisting Forging Machine
Metal Spinner/Metal spinning
Operator in placing material on anvil or
Machine Operator
carrying it off and are designated
according to nature of work done such as
Metal Spinner; Spinning Lathe Operator
Lever Man, Stamper Helper, Blacksmith
fashions metal sheet on spinning lathe
Helper, etc.
into hollow-ware, utensils, and fancy
articles using patterns and spinning tools
studies drawings and other specifications
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
of article to be made. Selects appropriate
Code 7221
mandrels. Wooden chuck or mould to
Title Blacksmiths, Hammersmiths and
make article. Fastens mould to spindle or
Forging Press Workers
lathe. Measures, marks, and cuts discs
from sheet metal stock and drills hole in
each disc using marking devices, shear
Family 7222
and drill press. Clamps disc to spinning
form mounted on head stock spindle of
Tool Makers and Related Workers
lathe by forcing follow block against disc
with tail stock (movable part of lathe).
Starts machine. Coats outside of rotating Toolmakers and related workers make
disc, forcing it to shape of spinning form, and repair custom made and specialized
VOLUME II B 90
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
tools, sports guns, locks, dies, patterns Tool Maker makes cutting and press tools,
machinery components and other metal gauges, simple jigs, fixtures, etc. mainly
articles using hand and machine tools to for use in machines. Studies drawings,
work metal to fine tolerances. samples and other specifications of tool or
gauge to be made. Selects required type
7222.0100 of metal or alloy and marks it for various
operations, using Vernier height gauges,
Marker, Metal
sine plate, vee blocks, etc. Cuts, files,
grinds, scrapes or otherwise shapes metal
Maker Metal; Layout Man marks metal
to specified dimensions frequently
according to drawing or sample for filing,
checking it while working with measuring
machining, grinding, drilling, forming,
instruments such as micrometre, Vernier,
erecting, etc. Studies drawings, sketches,
gauges, face plate etc. as necessary.
samples, etc., to determine nature of
Anneals, shapes, hardens and tempers
work. Selects metal such as sheet, blocks,
cutting tools ensuring correct cutting
angles, rods, etc. according to
angles, clearances, etc. according to
requirement and specification and applies
standard or prescribed specifications.
chalk or copper sulphate solution on
Assembles part, finishes object. Checks
finished surface. Calculates and marks
accuracy with precision measuring
outline with centre punch marks on
instruments and shadow graph if
finished surface of metal, indicating lines,
necessary to ensure desired performance.
curves or points as per dimensions and
Calibrates and adjusts tools and gauges
other specifications given in drawing for
where required and maintains them in
fitting, cutting, grinding, drilling,
good working order. Guides brazing of tips
developing, etc., using surface plate, angle
to stalks and finishes them to make tip
plates, Vernier height gauge, divider,
tools. Is designated as GAUGE MAKER if
marking block and other devices. Checks
engaged in making or reconditioning
markings by calculating dimensions to
gauges. May repair and recondition tools
ensure accuracy of size, distances etc.,
for further use. May design tools, jigs and
using scales, divider, square and other
fixtures and braze and weld metal parts.
tools. May use template for making
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
standard sizes of metal products. May
Code 7222
mark metal components with drawing
Title Tool Makers and Related Workers
numbers for final assembly and erection.
May be designated as SHEET METAL
7222.0300
MARKER, STRUCTURAL MARKER, TOOL
ROOM MARKER, MACHINE SHOP Jig and Fixture Marker
MARKER, etc., according to shop and
nature of work done. Jig and Fixture Maker makes and repairs
jigs and fixtures (device for holding metal
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and guiding cutting tools) for mass
Code 7222 production work. Studies drawing and
Title Tool Makers and Related Workers checks dimensions and other
specifications of sample to calculate
7222.0200 working details. Collects material, gets
surfaces finished by filing or machining
Tool Maker
and marks them off. Makes different parts
VOLUME II B 91
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
of required jig or fixture by cutting, filing, locks movements of machine table taking
machining, grinding, scraping, drilling, bearing from finished side of metal or
screwing, etc. and finishes them to object, lowers spindle to bring centring
required dimensions. Hardens and tool exactly over centre of hole to be
tempers necessary parts or gets them drilled, notes table readings, starts
done ensuring that they do not get machine and drills hole centre. Raises
demored. Assembles parts in proper spindle, replaces centring tool with pilot
sequence, fits hardened bushes or parts drill, sets machine feed and speed,
where specified to guide cutting tools and operates machine spindle and drills, pilot
checks easy fixing and removing of part to hole. Changes pilot drill with slightly less
be machined to ensure operational than hole size drill. Drills metal or object
efficiency of jig or fixture made. Checks and checks hole with plug gauge for
fitting of jig and fixture at each stage while alignment, angle, size, etc. Fixes dead size
assembling to conform to specifications. (exactly of size of hole to be made)
Tests completed jig or fixture by trial reamer or boring tool in machine spindle.
operations to ensure operational Sets feed and speed as necessary and
efficiency and accuracy in production bores hole to finished size ensuring
work. May make adaptors, pullers etc. for absolute accuracy of hole made. Stops
specific purposes. May machine and grind and starts machine and keeps coolant on
jig and fixture parts. as required while working. Unlocks table
movement, moves table sideways and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: across according to calculated pitch centre
Code 7222 distances of holes, taking bearing from
Title Tool Makers and Related Workers hole drilled and drills other holes in similar
manner. May drill more than one hole in
7222.0400 same surface in one setting. May grind
tools and oil and clean machine.
Jig Borer
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Jig Borer; Jig Boring Machine Operator
Code 7222
sets and operates precision jig boring
Title Tool Makers and Related Workers
machine for making highly accurate holes
in jigs, fixtures, castings, etc. Studies
7222.0500
drawings and other specifications and
calculates locations and sizes of holes to Die Maker
be drilled, pitch centre distances, etc. Die Maker; Die Fitter; Press Tool Fitter
Marks or gets metal or object marked makes metal dies to prescribed dimension
accurately to indicate exact position of for punching, cutting, forging and forming
holes to be bored. Sets machine table and of metal or synthetic components for
fastens metal or object on it in perfect mass production. Studies drawing and
level and correct alignment with clamps, specifications of dies to be made. Selects
fixtures, jigs, etc., using dial indicators, slip required type of metal or rough cast metal
gauges, optical scale of machine if block. Machines or grinds one surface and
provided, sine bars and other precision marks it with template or otherwise to
devices. Fits centring tool in chuck in indicate dimensions and other working
machine spindle. Moves table across and details. Cuts shapes, drill holes and mills
sideways according to machine reading, metal according to marking on various
VOLUME II B 92
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
machines. Checks dimensions while complete die formed and measures it
working with gauges and other measuring (casting) with callipers, micrometre, etc.
tools. Finishes made die (punch) by filing for dimensions. Makes alternations in die
to required dimension and fits female to halves if required checks with further lead
it. Files cutting angle and clearance castings and ensures that product formed
accurately in female die and checks for conforms to prescribed specifications.
sizes. Drills holes and cuts thread in Gets die halves tempered and finishes
female die for driving guide pin and fitting them by grinding. Sets them in machine
guide plates. Gets male and female dies and stamps or forges some trial pieces to
tempered and grinds them to finish ensure correct formation. May anneal,
ensuring correct shear, cutting angle, grind and sink dies again if necessary. May
clearances, etc. Sets finished dies in press do primary sinking of dies in vertical
and cuts or forms some trial pieces to milling machine.
ensure accuracy and correct production.
May shape female die block to required ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
angle for fitting it in bolster. May repair Code 7222
used dies and grind them to desired finish. Title Tool Makers and Related Workers
May operate lathe, milling and shaping 7222.0700
machines and harden and temper dies.
Locksmith
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Locksmith fits assembles and repairs locks
Code 7222
with finished parts by accurately sizing
Title Tool Makers and Related Workers
components, setting levers riveting etc.
studies design, sketch or model of lock to
7222.0600
be made. Collects various finished
Die Sinker, Hand components or parts and checks for
accuracy of fit by supplementary tooling
Die Sinker, Hand makes metal dies in two to remove defects. Assembles and fits
halves for manufacture of metal and parts in frame and rivets body to make
synthetic components using fine chisels, complete lock. Tests completed lock for
hand tools, machine, etc. Studies samples locking and unlocking with appropriate
or drawings of dies to be made. Selects key. Dismantles defective locks, repairs or
right type of metal or alloy rough cast replaces damaged parts and sets them
blocks. Gets one surface of each block right by setting or filing levers, riveting
ground finished. Marks one block to etc. Opens jammed locks using special
indicate position, size and shape of die to scriber to release levers and springs. May
be cut. Follows marking and removes install locks. May make parts of locks by
metal with different types of chisels, hand.
scrapers, etc. to form one half of die to be
made. Measures amount of metal ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
removed frequently while working with Code 7222
depth gauge, template, foot rule etc. to Title Tool Makers and Related Workers
ensure correct forming. Transfers
markings to other die block and (forms) 7222.0800
and shapes it in similar manner to form
Pattern Marker, Metal Foundry
other half of die. Takes lead casting of
VOLUME II B 93
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Pattern Maker Metal, Foundry makes and various carpentry processes. Removes
repairs metal patterns for making moulds rust if any and cleans barrel and other
for casting metals. Studies drawings and parts thoroughly. Assembles parts one by
other specification of pattern to be made one in order of sequence with hand tools
and calculates shrinkage allowances. ensuring stipulated performance, correct
Takes metal cast roughly to shape or setting, alignment, rigidity etc. sets back
selects metal from stock and marks it off. and fore sights in perfect alignment with
Grinds, smoothens and other wise shapes muzzle and stock for different ranges of
metal to required dimensions keeping shooting and adjusts it correctly by trial
shrinkage allowances in view. Measures shooting at firing range. Scrapes and
object (pattern) frequently while working polishes outer surface of barrel, trigger,
with callipers, foot rule, gauges etc. to trigger guard etc. and colours it by hot or
ensure correct shape and size. Assembles cold gun bluing process. May personally
pattern parts by screwing, soldering or test arms by trial firing at range to
otherwise fixing them together. Checks observe performance and accuracy.
completed pattern for accuracy using
gauges, micrometre, callipers, etc. and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
makes alterations if necessary. May repair Code 7222
broken or damaged patterns. Title Tool Makers and Related Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 7222.9900
Code 7222 Tool Makers and Related Workers,
Title Tool Makers and Related Workers
Other
7222.0900
Toolmakers and Related Workers, other
Armourer
include all other Tool Makers engaged in
making special or other types of tools
Armourer; Gunsmith; Fitter Arms such as fly cutters, capstan, from tools,
assembles, replaces parts and repairs etc., by performing one or more
guns, rifles, pistols etc. by further tooling combination of tasks, not elsewhere
as necessary. Checks complete small arm classified.
(gun, rifle, pistol etc.) or its components
such as stock, barrel, sight, trigger ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
mechanism, firing pins, ejector etc. for Code 7222
alignment, proper fittings, grooving, Title Tool Makers and Related Workers
functional operations, condition and
serviceability and locates defects if any. Family 7223
Dismantles complete arm or defective
Metal Working Machine Tool
portion as necessary and removes dents
Setters and Operators
and defects by further tooling, brazing etc.
or by replacement of broken or worn out
parts. Selects seasoned walnut, shisam or Metal Working Machine Tool Setters and
any other type of appropriate timber, Operators set and/or operate, various
marks it and makes butt of respective machine tools working to fine tolerances.
small arms, if defective, in correct
alignment with sights and barrel by 7223.0100
VOLUME II B 94
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Tool Setter, General holder of machine and securely screws it
in position. Places die on machine table
Tool Setter, General sets various types of and lowers punch to fit in die. Adjusts
precision metal cutting and grinding position of die in relation to punch.
machines for Machine Operators. Studies Clamps die securely on machine table
drawings and other specifications of parts with holders, plates, bolts and nuts and
to be made. Fixes metal and cutting tool manually operate punch few times to
accurately in position on machine using ensure that it passes clearly through die
chucks, jigs and other fixtures as required. set. Starts machine and feeds metal to cut
Adjusts machine table, guides, stops and or form trial pieces. Examines them for
other controls by manual operations correctness in all respects, resets die if
ensures that tool will cut or grind metal necessary, and hands press over to
according to specifications. Starts and operator for production work. May grind
operates machine to cut or grind sample press tools on surface grinder. May fit
product. Checks progress and accuracy of guide pin in die to avoid wastage of
cutting or grinding with precision material. May fit die in bolster (holding
measuring instruments such as device) before setting. May supervise
micrometre, Vernier, gauges, etc. and operators.
makes necessary adjustments to ensure
accuracy of final product and hands ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine over to operator for production. Code 7223
Charges tools and resets machine as Title Metal Working Machine Tool
necessary. May be designated as Setters and Operators
BROACHING MACHINE SETTER; MILLING
MACHINE SETTER; PROFILING MACHINE 7223.0300
SETTER; SHAPING MACHINE SETTER; Setter, Drop Forging Machine
SETTER LATHE, etc. according to type of
machine set. May do minor repairs to
Setter, Drop Forging Machine; Drop Forge
machine. May supervise work of machine
Setter sets dies in forging machine for
operators.
blacksmithy work to cut or form heated
metal parts to desired shape. Studies
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
drawing or part to be made and selects
Code 7223 required pair of dies. Fits top die securely
Title Metal Working Machine Tool in sliding hammer head of machine and
Setters and Operators places bottom die on anvil (base platform
7223.0200 of machine). Lowers top die by lever or
Tool Setter, Press otherwise slowly on bottom die and
adjusts position of bottom die in relation
Tool Setter, Press sets press tools (die and to top die to have equal clearance on all
punch) in power and hand press for sides. Sets bottom die securely on anvil
manufacture of sheet metal products. with bolts, clamps, nuts, plates, etc. and
Examines sample or studies drawings and checks for correct setting. Heats or gets
specifications of item for production. blank or material heated to required
Selects appropriate pair of die and punch temperature and forges some (two or
and examines them for sharpness, cutting three) trial pieces to ensure correct
angle, clearance, etc. Fits punch in punch production and minimum wastage of
VOLUME II B 95
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
material. Resets dies if necessary and coolant and hands over machine to
hands forge (machine) over to operator operator with required instructions for
with necessary instructions. May set rope tool manipulations and operations as
or belting to lifting device of hammer necessary. Visits machines under his
head. May be designated as DROP charge frequently, checks production and
HAMMER SETTER, PNEUMATIC HAMMER ensures that products of each machine
SETTER, STEAM HAMMER SETTER etc. are inter changeable and are
according to type of hammer or forging manufactured to required specifications.
machine set. Guides and resets tools where necessary.
May develop and form new tools for
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: specific operations and harden and
Code 7223 temper them. May suggest form and type
Title Metal Working Machine Tool of jig and fixture required.
Setters and Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7223
7223.0400 Title Metal Working Machine Tool
Setters and Operators
Setter, Automatic Machine
7223.0401
Setter Automatic Machine sets various
Assembly Line Machine Setter
types of precision metal cutting tools in
automatic machines for specific repetitive
operations for mass production of metal Assembly Line Machine Setter oversees
articles or components. Studies drawings assembly operation as per the required
and other specifications of metal parts or norms and assembly of aggregates in the
articles to be made. Selects appropriate vehicles and includes controls for machine
tools and securely fixes them in automatic operation, temperature and pressure
machines in order of sequence of including all machine settings.
operations. Fastens metal accurately in
position in machine using chuck, jig or Qualification Pack Details:
fixture as required. Starts machine. QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3603
Operates different tools manually in order QP NOS Name Assembly Line
of sequence to cut metal to required Machine Setter
specifications. Checks metal frequently NSQF Level 6
while cutting with precision measuring
instruments to ensure accuracy and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
regulates feed of metal, travel and Code 7223
movement of tools, etc. by setting locking Title Metal Working Machine Tool
devices, guides, automatic and other Setters and Operators
controls after each completed operation.
Cuts trial piece according to settings done 7223.0500
to check accuracy of each operation and
Mechanist, General/Machinist
cutting of metal to prescribed dimensions.
Resets controls, guides, etc. where
Machinist General operates various types
necessary to ensure accuracy. Sets
of power driven metal cutting or grinding
machine feed and speed, adjusts flow of
machines for cutting and grinding metal.
VOLUME II B 96
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Studies drawings or measures out sample involves setting machine parameters,
with appropriate measuring instruments supervising all kinds of machining and in-
to note different dimensions and line inspection activities for quality
sequence of operations required. Selects verification, resolving line operation
metal piece and marks it or gets it marked issues, ensuring compliance to all super
for machining operations required. finishing, tool room operations etc.
Fastens metal in chuck, jig or other fixture
and respective tool or cutter, according to Qualification Pack Details:
sequence of operation, on appropriate QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3506
machine. Checks machine setting or sets it QP NOS Name Machine Shop
for stipulated machine operations. Selects Master
machine feed and speed and starts Technician/Setter
machine. Controls flow of coolant (cutting NSQF Level 6
lubricant) and manipulates hand wheels
or applies automatic controls to feed tool
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to metal or metal to tool. Observes
Code 7223
cutting or grinding both from marking and
Title Metal Working Machine Tool
machine readings, checks for dimensions
Setters and Operators
as necessary and removes parts when
machining is completed, checks
7223.0502
completed part with measuring
Machine Shop Supervisor
instruments and gauges to ensure
prescribed accuracy. Makes adjustments if
necessary and repeats operations, as Machining Supervisor role covers
required, on same or other machines. supervision of operations for different
May assist in setting up machine for machine tools performed both manually
repetitive work, change tools, make and through automatic/CNC
simple adjustments, clean and oil machines/robots. This role primarily
machine. involves supervising all kinds of machining
and in-line inspection activities for quality
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: verification, resolving line operation
issues, review of fixtures etc.
Code 7223
Title Metal Working Machine Tool
Qualification Pack Details:
Setters and Operators
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3505
7223.0501 QP NOS Name Machine Shop
Supervisor
Machine Shop Master
NSQF Level 5
Technician/Setter
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Machine Shop Master Technician/Setter
Code 7223
sets parameters and programming of CNC
Title Metal Working Machine Tool
and other machining equipment’s,
Setters and Operators
supervision of operations for different
machine tools performed both manually
7223.0601
and through automatic/CNC
Turner/Conventional Turning
machines/robots. This role primarily
VOLUME II B 97
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Turner; Lathe Operator makes metal 7223.0700
articles to required specifications using Turret and Capstan Lathe Operator
lathe and cutting tools. Studies drawings
and other specifications of parts to be
Turret and Capstan Lathe Operator
made. Selects metal, holds it in chuck, jig
operates turret or capstan lathe for mass
or fixture on lathe as required, centres it
production of metal components. Studies
by manipulating chuck jaws or otherwise
specifications of parts to be fashioned.
using dial indicator or marking block and
Checks tools set in order of sequence of
securely tightens it in position. Selects
operations in appropriate parts of turret.
correct cutting tool, grinds it if necessary
Clamps work piece accurately in position
and holds it tight in tool post at correct
on lathe using chuck, collets, fixtures or
height. Sets feed and speed and starts
other device as required. Checks guides
machine. Manipulates hand wheels or
and stops set by Tool Setter or by self to
starts automatic controls to guide cutting
limit or control movement of tools.
tool into or along metal. Controls flow of
Selects rotation speed of metal as guided
coolant (cutting lubricant) on edge of tool.
and starts machine. Manipulates hand
Arranges gears in machine to obtain
wheels or sets and starts automatic
required pitch for screw cutting.
controls to guide each cutting tool in turn
Calculates tapers and sets machine for
in order of sequence into or along metal.
taper turning, controls lathe during
Controls flow of cutting lubricant to tool
operation by means of hand wheels and
tips. Observes cutting operation by
levers and frequently checks progress of
different tools. Stops machine after each
cutting with measuring instruments such
operation and checks machining with
as callipers and rule, micrometres, etc.
gauges and measuring instruments and
Stops machine, removes completed part
makes necessary adjustments if necessary
and checks it further with instruments to
to ensure accuracy. Is designated as
ensure accuracy. Repeats operations if
WARD OPERATOR, if engaged in operating
necessary. Cleans and oils machine. Is
ward machine (a type of automatic lathe).
designated as ROLL TURNER; RELIEVING
May shape and sharpen lathe tools. May
LATHE OPERATOR; SURFACE LATHE
oil and grease machine.
OPERATOR etc. according to type of lathe
on which worked. May improvise devices
and make simple adjustments to machine.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
May recondition lathe tools.
Code 7223
Title Metal Working Machine Tool
Qualification Pack Details:
Setters and Operators
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0110
QP NOS Name Conventional
7223.0701
Turning
Lathe Machinist
NSQF Level 2
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Lathe Operator is also known as a Lathe
Machinist. A Lathe Operator is responsible
Code 7223
for setting up, operating and monitoring
Title Metal Working Machine Tool
lathe or turning machines, shaping or
Setters and Operators
threading wire, rod or bar stock. A Lathe
VOLUME II B 98
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Operator studies blueprints and tooling Title Metal Working Machine Tool
instructions to determine Setters and Operators
the correct procedure for machining the
component in such a manner that 7223.0900
facilitates maximum efficiency in tool Planer
usage and time. The operator also
performs machine maintenance and
Planer sets and operates single or double
checks tools for signs of wear.
column smoothening machine to shape
metal objects to required dimensions.
Qualification Pack Details:
Studies drawings and specifications for
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1901 setting work piece and tools for different
QP NOS Name Lathe Operator operations involved. Fastens metal object
NSQF Level 4 accurately in position on machine table
with bolts, nuts and other fixtures. Selects
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: single or double faced tool and fixes it in
Code 7223 tool holder of machine. Adjusts guides,
Title Metal Working Machine Tool stop and other controls to set speed and
Setters and Operators limits of forward and backward
movements of machine table. Starts
7223.0800 machine. Turns hand wheels to bring
cutting tool position over metal to start
Shaper
machining. Manipulates hand-wheels or
starts automatic controls to guide tool
Shaper; Shaping Machine Operator shapes
into and across metal at end of each
metal objects to required specifications
stroke. Changes tool and position of metal
using shaping machine and cutting tools.
if required. Checks and measures work to
Examines drawings and other
ensure correct dimensions. Adjusts
specifications of part to be made. Fastens
position of table or tool as necessary for
metal accurately in position in vice.
accurate performance. May oil machine.
Selects appropriate cutting tool and fixes
May specialize in any particular type of
it in tool holder on machine. Sets
planning and be designated accordingly.
appropriate speed feed and stroke of
machine depending on nature of required
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
cut, type of metal etc. Adjusts machine
Code 7223
table and tool post by manipulating levers
Title Metal Working Machine Tool
or controls. Starts machine. Turns hand-
Setters and Operators
wheel to feed cutting tool into or across
work or engages automatic feed. Checks
7223.1000
progress of cutting with measuring
instruments and makes necessary Planer, Edge
adjustments to ensure accuracy. Stops
machine when completed and removes Planer, Edge planes edges of heavy metal
work from it. May sharpen and make own plate, girders etc. for structural work using
tools. May oil and clean machine. appropriate cutting tools and edge
shaping machine. Fastens plates, angles
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and other metal objects accurately in
Code 7223 position on machine table using fixtures,
VOLUME II B 99
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
bolts and nuts. Selects appropriate cutting machine, and make simple adjustments.
tool and clamps to machine spindle. May recondition and sharpen tools.
Selects and sets speed and feed of
machine depending on nature of machine ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
operation and metal used. Starts machine. Code 7223
Lowers spindle of machine with cutting Title Metal Working Machine Tool
tool over metal to plane or cut edges. Setters and Operators
Regulates flow of cutting lubricant over
edge of tool where necessary. Finishes 7223.1201
edges of metal to required finish or
Miller/Operator–Conventional
smoothness by changing shaping or
Milling
grinding tools in machine. Checks finished
metal with measuring instruments and
gauges for accuracy. May oil and clean Miller cuts metal blocks, gears, tools,
machine. May sharpen machine tools. cutters, jigs, components, etc. accurately
May specialize in particular type of according to drawings or samples by
planing and be designated accordingly. means of multi-toothed rotary cutters on
milling machine. Studies drawings and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: other specifications of part to be made.
Calculates feed, speed table, cutter and
Code 7223
work angles, indexing, gear trains, number
Title Metal Working Machine Tool
and type of cutter required, etc. using
Setters and Operators
trigonometrical and log tables as
necessary. Fastens blank (object) securely
7223.1100
on machine table on vice or between
Slotter
centres as required in correct alignment
using dial indicator, bolts, nuts, clamps
Slotter; Slotting Machine Operator sets and other fixtures and instruments.
and operates slotting machine to cut slots Selects and clamps selected cutter on
keyways etc. in metal work pieces. arbor (tool holding device of) or spindle of
Examines drawings and other milling machine. Sets machine, dividing
specifications for type and size of slots head, work, gear trains, machine feed and
and keyways to be cut on metal objects. speed etc. depending on nature of
Fastens metal object accurately in machine operation and metal handled.
position on machine table with bolts, Starts machine. Manipulates hand wheels
clamps and other fixtures. Selects cutting or applies automatic controls to start
tool and fixes it in tool holder of machine. machining. Controls flow of cutting
Adjusts guides, stops and other controls lubricant on edge of tool and observes
to set stroke and speed of tool movement. progress of cutting. Stops machine and
Adjusts table and sets work piece checks product while machining and on
correctly for cutting operations. Starts completion using gauges and measuring
machine and applies cut. Observes instruments for accuracy. Repeats process
progress of cutting. Stops machine and if necessary. May perform machine
checks slotted or grooved area for operations such as keyway milling, gear
accuracy of depth and width using cutting, facing flute cutting, surfacing etc.
measuring instruments. Cleans and oils as required. Is designated as HOBBING
machine. May assist in setting up MACHINE OPERATOR, if engaged in
VOLUME II B 100
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
hobbing machine. May clean and oil designated as BEVEL GEAR SHAPER; GEAR
machine. May grind and make form PLANER; GEAR SHAPER; GEAR HOBBER;
cutters. etc., according to type of gear and
machine operated.
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0108 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Name Operator– Code 7223
Conventional Title Metal Working Machine Tool
Milling Setters and Operators
NSQF Level 2
7223.1400
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Heavy Duty End Mill Operator
Code 7223
Title Metal Working Machine Tool Heavy Duty End-Mill Operator machines
Setters and Operators ends of columns, girders etc. to required
finish for structural work by means of
7223.1300 segmented end-mill and heavy duty
Gear Cutter milling machine. Fastens metal object
accurately in position on machine table,
using nuts, bolts and other fixtures.
Gear Cutter cuts gear-teeth on metal
Selects appropriate segmented milling
blanks on gear cutting machine using
cutter and fixes it to machine spindle.
special cutters. Examines drawings and
Adjusts guides, stops and other controls
other specifications of gear to be cut.
or determine speed and limits of table
Calculates suitable gear trains for division,
movement. Starts machine. Controls flow
cutter and blank arbor rotations proper
of cutting lubricant on edge of tool and
helix, and different angles, automatic
observes progress of milling ends of metal
feed, number and type of cutter etc. and
object. Stops machine when milling is over
sets machine accordingly. Mounts blank in
and checks finished surface for accuracy
position using mandrel, fixtures etc. as
to required tolerances using measuring
required and sets appropriate cutter or
instruments. Removes metal from table
tool on machine. Turns and adjusts angle
and repeats process. May oil and clean
and position of blank and cutter in
machine.
relation to one another and adjusts relief
of cutter teeth according to calculations.
Adjusts guides and stops to limit or ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
control movement of tools. Selects Code 7223
rotation speed of metal blank and starts Title Metal Working Machine Tool
machine. Turns hand wheels or engages Setters and Operators
automatic controls to guide cutting tool
into or along metal. Controls flow of 7223.1500
cutting lubricant over tools and observes Driller Metal, General
operation. Stops machine and checks cut
teeth for size, depth and shape using
Driller Metal, General drills holes in metals
measuring instruments and gauges for
according to specifications using drilling
accuracy. Cleans and oils machine. May
machine. Studies markings or drawings
grind or recondition own tools. Is
and other specifications for type and
VOLUME II B 101
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
nature of holes to be drilled. Selects over required area of metal for drilling
appropriate drilling bit or cutter and fits it and starts machine. Lowers spindle, aligns
in machine spindle using drilling chuck or drill accurately over hole to be drilled.
otherwise. Aligns metal accurately in Checks setting for accuracy by trial,
position on machine, table using jigs and readjusts if necessary and locks respective
other fixtures as required. Adjusts guides positions. Controls flow of coolant while
and stops to limit or control downward drilling. Checks hole for accuracy. Repeats
movement of drill. Sets rotating speed of drilling operation over wide area of metal
spindle and starts machine. Lowers drill by stretching radial arm and adjusting
exactly on control punch mark on hole to position of carriage and drilling spindle
be drilled. Controls flow of cutting over hole to be drilled. Is designated as
lubricant on edge of drill. Observes TOWER DRILLING MACHINE OPERATOR if
progress of drilling and makes necessary engaged in operating tower drilling
adjustments to ensure accuracy. Stops machine to drill large number of uniform
machine and pull out drill when hole is holes in big plates, columns etc. by
drilled. Cleans drilled area and checks hole adjusting position of travelling tower in
for accuracy with measuring instrument. relation to location of holes to be drilled.
Selects and uses counter bores where May clean and oil machine. May grind
required. May use reamers for reaming drills. May cut screws with tapping
operation. May do tapping (screw cutting) arrangement and do reaming and counter
on drilling machine using tapping boring where needed.
attachment. May sharpen and recondition
drill bits or tools. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7223
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Metal Working Machine Tool
Code 7223
Title Metal Working Machine Tool 7223.1701
Setters and Operators Borer/Operator Boring Machine
Operator
7223.1600
Borer bores holes in metal objects for
Radial Driller
various mechanical purposes by means of
boring bars and boring machine. Examines
Radial Driller operates radial drilling drawings and other specifications of holes
machine to drill holes in heavy metal to be bored. Fastens metal object
blocks, girders, plates, etc. by adjusting accurately in position on machine table,
radial arm and carriage of machine using jigs and fixtures as required. Selects
according to positions of holes to be boring bar and fixes it in machine spindle.
drilled. Studies drawings and other Centres hole accurately using cutting tool
specifications for size and number of holes as guide and adjusting object to desired
to be drilled on metal. Fastens metal position. Selects and sets speed and feed
accurately in position on machine table, of machine. Starts machine to rotate
using dial indicator, jigs and other fixtures cutting tool or object depending on type
as required. Selects appropriate drill and of machine operated and moves levers to
fixes it in machine spindle. Draws by hand advance cutting tool into position to start
moveable arm or carriage to bring drill bit boring. Controls flow of cutting lubricant
VOLUME II B 102
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
on edge of tool. Checks progress of boring and ensures that cuttings are drawn off by
with measuring instruments and makes suction while boring. Stops machine when
necessary adjustments to ensure boring to required finish is completed and
accuracy. Stops machine when boring is cutting tool automatically withdrawn from
completed and removes object from cylinder hole. Checks cylinder hole with
table. Repeats operations as required. measuring instruments to ensure
Sets machine to required pitch after accuracy. Repeats operations as required
adjusting hole position while threading by on other holes to be bored. May do
boring machine. Is designated as cylinder re-boring. May make simple
VERTICAL BORER or HORIZONTAL BORER adjustments to machine. May clean and
according to type of machine operated. oil machine.
May clean and oil machine. May sharpen
and recondition tools. May set the ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine for operator. May set depth of Code 7223
cut and do step boring in blind holes. Title Metal Working Machine Tool
Setters and Operators
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0107 7223.1900
QP NOS Name Boring Machine Rifling Machine Operator
NSQF Level 2
Rifling Machine Operator sets and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
operates rifling machine to make grooves
Code 7223 inside rifle barrels. Studies drawings and
Title Metal Working Machine Tool other specifications of barrel rifling of to
Setters and Operators be done. Centres barrel in steady-rests
and chuck of machine. Mounts
7223.1800 appropriate broach cutter or sets of
Cylinder Borer cutters on cutting head at end of riffling
bar of machine and adjusts them to cut
Cylinder Borer Bores cylinders of engines grooves of required specification.
to specified accuracy by means of cylinder Regulates oil feed on edge of cutter. Starts
boring machine and special cutting tools. machine to move rifling bar and cutters
Examines drawings and other spirally through bore of barrel. Observes
specifications of cylinder to be bored. operation of cutting grooves (rifling) in
Fastens cylinder block on machine table in bore surface. Stops machine when cutter
position by use of jigs and fixtures as has passed entirely through bore and
required. Selects cutting tool and fixes it withdraws rifling bar. Measures rifling
in machine spindle. Adjusts position of with gauges to ensure conformity to
cylinder block accurately below cutting specification. Removes barrel from
tool exactly over cylinder hole to be cut. machine and inspects rifling for defects.
Selects rotation speed of tool,, starts Removes dulled cutters and replaces them
machine and applies cut. Switches on with sharpened ones as necessary to
vacuum pump mechanism of machine. ensure that rifling grooves are cut to
Controls flow of lubricant on tool. specified depth. May shape, harden and
Observes progress of work. Checks size of temper cutting tools.
bore with gauge or measuring instrument
VOLUME II B 103
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7223 Glazer; Buffer grinds and polishes metal
Title Metal Working Machine Tool components before and after
Setters and Operators electroplating, on polishing lathe, using
appropriate wheel of cloth, leather or felt
7223.2000 and chemical compounds. Starts polishing
Bending-Machine Operator lathe, fit buffing wheel to it and applies
emery compound. Holds component in
Bending-Machine Operator sets up and
hand or in suitable holding device and
operates machine to bend metal
presses it against rotating wheel. Grinds
structural shapes, such as bars, rods,
surface slowly to uniform finish. Replaces
angles, pipes, and tubes, to angle or
buffing wheel by polishing wheel, applies
contour specified by work order,
polishing compound and repeats process
drawings, templates, or layout: Selects
for setting grains and obtaining high
and bolts holding clamp, die block, and
polish. May also polish metal articles
guide clamp to machine. Positions and
without plating.
clamps end stops on machine to set
specified location of bend. Inserts or
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
screws plug stops into guide wheel to set
specified degree of bend. Positions Code 7223
workpiece against end stop. Locks holding Title Metal Working Machine Tool
clamp and guide clamp onto workpiece. Setters and Operators
Lubricates workpiece with oil. Starts
turntable that draws workpiece through 7223.2200
guide clamp around die block until Grinder, Tool and Cutter
stopped by plug stops or until dial
indicator points to specified degree of Grinder, Tool and Cutter grinds machine
bend. May slide mandrel into tubing tools and cutter to correct specifications
instead of using guide clamp. May preheat by special grinding machines and wheel.
workpiece, using hand torch or heating Studies drawings and other specifications
furnace. May use hand-powered bending to understand nature of grinding
machine for short runs. May fill tubes or operation required. Fastens appropriate
pipe with sand, resin, or lead to prevent abrasive wheel to spindle of machine.
wrinkling or collapsing during bending Mounts cutting tool to be ground on
operation. May heat tube, using torch, machine using dividing head, jig or fixture
and manually bend tube or pipe around as required. Manipulates swivel tables,
forming blocks. May flare tube ends, using wheel head and work holding device,
tube flare and cut or trim metal stock to guide finger, etc. as necessary to set
length, using power shears or saws. machine to appropriate angle for grinding
desired level on cutting edges of tool
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: selects and sets speed and feed to
Code 7223 machine according to nature of work and
Title Metal Working Machine Tool wheel used. Starts machine, brings
Setters and Operators rotating grinding wheel in contact with
edge of tool and grinds proper angles,
7223.2100 clearance, flutes etc. as required on tool
Glazer or cutter set, frequently checking it with
VOLUME II B 104
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
gauge or measuring instrument while wastage, maintains production and gets
grinding to ensure accuracy. Rotates work cuttings and components removed as
through proper angle by dividing head or necessary. Is designated as Broaching
otherwise to set next flute or teeth of tool Machine Operator if engaged in broaching
or cutter for grinding and continues operation (cutting away metal). May get
operation. Uses cutting fluid or coolant as metal strips and shafts oiled before
found necessary and ensures that no part feeding. May clean and oil machine.
of work gets burnt or damaged while ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
grinding. Stops machine and removes tool Code 7223
when grinding is completed. Changes Title Metal Working Machine Tool
grinding wheel and position of tool as and Setters and Operators
when required. May give final finish to
cutting edge by hand using hones. May oil 7223.2400
and clean machine. May specialize in
Sheet Metal Machine Operator
grinding a particular type of tool and be
designated accordingly. May check ground
Sheet Metal Machine Operator operates
tool or cutter by shadow projector to
sheet metal machine for sizing, bending
ensure accurate finish.
and forming sheet metal for further
operations. Sets machine to required
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
dimensions (except press tools) using
Code 7223
common measuring instruments such as
Title Metal Working Machine Tool
foot rule, callipers etc. Operates machine,
Setters and Operators
feeds trial piece and checks for
dimensions and resets machine if
7223.2300
necessary. Checks out-turn from time to
Power Press Operator, Metal time to ensure correctness. May operate
one or more sheet metal working
Power Press Operator, Metal operates machines such as shearing machine,
power driven press for manufacture of bending machine, channelling machine,
sheet metal components by punching, forming machine and is designated as
blanking and forming operations. SHEARING MACHINE OPERATOR,
Operates machine manually to check BENDING MACHINE OPERATOR,
length of stroke of rams, setting of die and CHANNELLING MACHINE OPERATOR,
punch, placing of safety guards and GROOVING MACHINE OPERATOR,
ensures that machine is safe for FORMING MACHINE OPERATOR, etc. May
operation. Starts machine, feeds metal set cutters, blades, dies etc. and
strip, sheet or component on die and undertake minor repairs under guidance.
presses foot pedal or hand lever, as
provided in machine, to bring punch over ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
die to cut, bend or form metal according Code 7223
to type of tool set. Stops machine, get trial Title Metal Working Machine Tool
pieces inspected and continue operation Setters and Operators
after resetting, if necessary. Arranges
ready stock of feeding material and set 7223.2500
machine for continuous operation if
Ball Filling Machine Operator
possible. Observes operation, avoids
VOLUME II B 105
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Ball Filing Machine Operator sets and prescribed. Starts machine, sets rotation
operates ball filing machine for filing balls speed of wheel and regulates flow of
to required diameters. Studies drawings coolant and oil into machine. Opens
and other specifications of ball to be hopper gate and feeds ball into machine.
made. Starts pump and conveyor, feeds Observes operation and adjusts feed
roughly pressed balls into intake hopper finger and pick-off finger in tool pocket for
and regulates its supply to machine. Feeds obtaining required finish. May operate
balls into conveyor and rotates pressure ball grinding machine and be designated
wheel manually for trial operation. according.
Adjusts machine, guides, stop and other
controls to regulate load, wheel pressure,
etc. according to machine performances ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and specifications prescribed. Rotates Code 7223
wheel at required speed to control cutting Title Metal Working Machine Tool
of balls fed and ensures desired Setters and Operators
smoothness of ball surface. Starts
machine. Adjusts feed finger and pick off 7223.2700
finger in tool pocket for obtaining desired
Dividing Machine Operator
clearances. Examines filed balls visually
and with measuring instrument to ensure
Dividing Machine Operator calibrates and
uniformity, smoothness of filing and
graduates metal, wood, perspex or ivory
adherence to specifications. Unloads filed
scales into required number of divisions
balls from machine through chute to
by dividing machine for measuring lengths
container placed below. May clean and oil
and angles. Studies drawings and other
machine. May operate ball grinding
specifications of parts to be calibrated.
machine and be designated as BALL
Selects metal, ivory or plastic work piece
GRINDING MACHINE OPERATOR.
depending on nature of work and
specifications prescribed. Marks or bisects
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
work piece as required. Secures blank
Code 7223 plate on circular or rectangular calibrated
Title Metal Working Machine Tool or graduated base plate of machine with
Setters and Operators catching devices. Aligns blank and base
plates according to specification and
7223.2600 number of divisions to be marked. Adjusts
Ball Lapping Machine Operator dividing machine by turning its pointer to
required position; and sets it (machine) to
Ball Lapping Machine Operator lapps steel required rotations to rotate base and
balls after grinding to accurate and high blank plate to set position according to
finish by special grinding wheels and number of division required. Presses and
lapping machine mostly for manufacture draws forward by hand pointer of
of ball bearings. Starts pump and machine over blank plate to cut lines,
conveyor and feeds hard ground balls into marks etc. to indicate divisions. Completes
intake hopper. Adjusts machine, guides, calibrating plate with specified divisions to
stops and other controls to regulate load, indicate lengths, angles etc., by rotating
wheel pressure etc. according to machine wheel of machine and graduating blank
performance and specifications plate with pointer mechanism. Removes
VOLUME II B 106
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
calibrated plate from machine and cleans pattern. Stops machine when required to
and polishes it to give smooth finish using change tracer and cutter according to
emery paper. Sends graduated plate to nature of operation and continues
Engraver for engraving appropriate operation until master pattern is
numerals, words, degrees, etc. May completely reproduced on metal block.
sharpen knife or cutter of machine. May Checks completed die copied on metal
engrave plate with specified marks, block along with master, using precision
symbols, etc. instruments and ensures desired accuracy
in all dimensions. May oil and clean
machine. May send machined die for
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: further milling (cutting) to secure better
Code 7223 or final finish if necessary.
Title Metal Working Machine Tool
Setters and Operators ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7223
7223.2800 Title Metal Working Machine Tool
Die Copying Machine Operator/Die Setters and Operators
Sinking Electric Discharge Machine
7223.2900
Operator
Profiling Machine Operator
Die Copying Machine Operator; Die Sinker
Machine sets and operates special type of
Profiling Machine Operator sets and
electronic or hydraulic die sinking
operates profiling machine (special type of
machine for making dies by copying
milling machine) to make smaller dies,
master (Pattern). Places master and metal
gauges, etc. by copying samples and
block at appropriate distance on machine
templates in two dimensions (length and
table and rigidly secures them in position
breadth). Fixes cutting tool and work
with bolts and nuts. Selects tracer pin or
(metal block) on machine and sets table
feeler and fixes it in machine spindle over
feed and cutter speed. Clamps model
master and sets appropriate cutter in
(sample) or template of object to be made
other spindle over metal block to be cut.
on fixture attached to machine. Fits
Centres position of tracing pin and cutting
tracing finger or pin on secondary or
tool by adjusting position of master and
tracing spindle of machine. Turns and
metal block by movement of machine
wheels to bring tracing finger in contact
table according to markings made on
with model or template and milling cutter
block. Lowers spindles to have tracer pin
with work respectively. Regulates flow of
or feeler touch master and cutter set on
coolant (cutting lubricant) on cutter and
metal block. Sets feed and speed of
starts machine. Observes operation of
machine. Starts machine and regulates
automatic machining of work of copying
flow of coolant over cutter. Observes
sample or template according to travel of
operation as tracing pin or feeler travels
tracing figure in contact with model
over contours of master die and its
(sample or template). Checks progress
reproduction by processes of copying on
from time to time with precision
metal block by cutter. Measures machined
measuring instruments to ensure correct
area frequently with precision
machining. Stops machine to change
instruments for length, width and depth
milling cutter. Re-sets work in position,
and ensures exact copying of master
VOLUME II B 107
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
etc. if necessary and continues machining and through automatic/CNC
until model is exactly reproduced in work machines/robots. This role primarily
to ensure accurate copying. Removes involves all kinds of machining and in-line
work from machine, cleans and oils inspection activities for quality
machine. May be designated according to verification, ad hoc repair work, change of
parts and nature of profiling work done. worn out parts, gauging and deburring
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: activities.
Code 7223 Qualification Pack Details:
Title Metal Working Machine Tool QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3503
Setters and Operators QP NOS Name Machining
Technician/CNC
7223.3000 Operator L4
Metal Stamper NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Metal Stamper stamps trademarks, code
Code 7223
number and other designs on metal parts
Title Metal Working Machine Tool
or components using stamping machine.
Setters and Operators
Fits appropriate metal die containing
trademarks, symbol, batch number etc.,
7223.5002
to spindle of stamping machine. Starts
machine. Places hot or cold metal object CNC Operator-Machining
or component holding with tongs, below Technician
spindle on machine table and presses
pedal to lower and press die over metal CNC Operator-Machining Technician sets
for stamping appropriate marking, checks up base level operations of different
and ensures that stamping on metal is machine tools and same can be
clear. Reports defects to superior and gets performed both manually and through
machine reset. Removes stamped metal automatic machines/robots. Machining
from table and places it at required place. Technician Level 3 is often called Assistant
May clean and oil machine. May keep Machinist, Junior Machinist, Lathe
record of stampings made. Operator, Apprentice Machinist, Semi-
Skilled Operator. This role primarily
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: involves supporting the Machine Operator
Code 7223 in all pre machining activities, machining
Title Metal Working Machine Tool of the actual part, ad hoc repair work like
Setters and Operators in auto service stations, gauging, de-
burring and inspection activities
7223.5001
Machining Technician/CNC Qualification Pack Details:
Operator QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3501
QP NOS Name CNC Operator-
Machining
Machining Technician is also known as
Technician L3
Machinist or CNC Machine Operator. The
NSQF Level 3
role covers operations of different
machine tools performed both manually
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 108
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Code 7223 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Metal Working Machine Tool Code 7223
Setters and Operators Title Metal Working Machine Tool
Setters and Operators
7223.5003
CNC Operator-Machinist 7223.5005
CNC Setter cum Operator-Vertical
A CNC Operator is responsible for Machining Centre
maintaining and operating CNC machine.
The individual monitors gauges and dials.
CNC Operator-Vertical Machining Centre
The individual must be proficient in
produces components that combine a
programming and setting CNC machinery.
number of different features, such as flat
faces, parallel faces, faces square to each
Qualification Pack Details:
other, faces at an angle, steps/shoulders,
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1903 open and enclosed slots, drilled, bored
QP NOS Name CNC Operator and reamed holes, internal threads, and
NSQF Level 4 special forms. It involves continuously
monitoring, inspecting the components
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and meeting production targets.
Code 7231
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and Qualification Pack Details:
Fitters QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0123
QP NOS Name CNC Operator-
7223.5004 Vertical Machining
CNC Operator-Vertical Machining Centre
Centre NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
CNC Operator-Vertical Machining Centre
produces components that combine a Code 7223
number of different features, such as flat Title Metal Working Machine Tool
faces, parallel faces, faces square to each Setters and Operators
other, faces at an angle, steps/shoulders,
open and enclosed slots, drilled, bored 7223.6001
and reamed holes, internal threads, and CNC Setter cum Operator-Turning
special forms. It involves continuously
monitoring, inspecting the components CNC Setter cum Operator-Turning sets up
and meeting production targets. the CNC turning machine, its work holding
devices, tooling, loading the machine
Qualification Pack Details: operating programs, conducting trial runs
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0116 and correcting faults, in order to ensure
QP NOS Name CNC Operator- that the work output is produced as per
Vertical Machining specification.
Centre
NSQF Level 3 Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0120
VOLUME II B 109
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
QP NOS Name CNC Setter cum Qualification Pack Details:
Operator-Turning QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0401
NSQF Level 4 QP NOS Name CNC Programmer
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7223 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Metal Working Machine Tool Code 7223
Setters and Operators Title Metal Working Machine Tool
Setters and Operators
7223.6002
CNC Operator-Turning 7223.9900
Metal Working Machine Tool
CNC Operator-Turning removes metal Setters and Operators, Others
from the outer diameter of a rotating
cylindrical workpiece. It also involves Machine Tool Operators, Other includes
inspecting the components and all other Machine Tool Operators engaged
continuously monitoring of the machining in operating automatic, semi-automatic
operations and making minor adjustments and simple special purpose production
in order to ensure that the work output is machines, sawing and filing by machine,
to the required quality and accuracy. grinding by hand, cutting threads in bolts
and nuts etc., and may be designated as;
Qualification Pack Details: Automatic Machine Operator if tends and
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0115 feed, one or more automatic machine
QP NOS Name CNC Operator- tools; De-Burrer if removes burrs and
Turning rough spots from metal parts or castings
NSQF Level 3 by use of hand files or using emery stone;
Sawing Machine Operator if cuts and files
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: various materials using electrically
Code 7223 powered band-type sawing and filing
Title Metal Working Machine Tool machines; Thread Roller if tends screw-
Setters and Operators making machine in which thread is formed
on screws by rolling head with circular
7223.6003 dies by action of hardened metal dies that
reciprocate, rolling screw shank between
CNC Programmer
their surfaces and pressing metal of screw
shank into thread form; Tapping Machine
CNC Programmer produce the component
Operator if cuts internal and external
program using manual data input or by
threads by means of tapping machine set
use of a remote computer, saving the
up and adjusted by other workers or
prepared program on the machine
themselves; Profile Roller etc.
controller from the computer. This
involves understanding the CNC machine
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
tools used in the process, their application
Code 7223
and programming, editing and proving
Title Metal Working Machine Tool
process, in adequate depth to provide a
Setters and Operators
sound basis for carrying out the activities.
VOLUME II B 110
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Family 7224 Fitter-Fabrication
Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders Fitter-Fabrication identifies metals, tools;
and Tool Sharpeners carrying out fitting and fabrication
operations like measuring, marking out,
sawing, grinding, drilling, chiselling,
Metal polishers, wheel grinders and tool
threading, tapping, scraping, manual
sharpeners polish and grind metal
lapping and inspecting of components in
surfaces and sharpen tools.
order to fit a component as per
specifications. It also involves basic oxy-
7224.0100
fuel gas cutting and basic manual arc
Grinder, General welding as per given instructions and
under supervision.
Grinder General grinds and smoothens
metal surfaces to specified accuracy using Qualification Pack Details:
one or more type of grinding machine. QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0303
Examines drawings and other QP NOS Name Fitter-Fabrication
specifications of part to be ground. Selects NSQF Level 2
grinding wheel of appropriate size, shape
and abrasive quality and fastens it on ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
spindle of machine. Mounts metal part
Code 7224
accurately in position on machine using
Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
chucks, jigs, fixtures or between centres of
and Tool Sharpeners
head and tail stock of machine as required
and sets it accurately either parallel or at
7224.0200
angle in relation to grinding wheel as
Grinder, Crankshaft
specified using appropriate devices and
instruments necessary. Adjusts machine
Grinder, Crankshaft grinds crank pins and
table, guides, stops and other controls to
journals of crankshaft accurately to
determine direction and limit of metal and
uniform diameters by special grinding
grinding wheel movements. Selects
machine and attachments. Studies
grinding wheel speed and starts machine
drawings and other specifications of parts
for grinding. Manipulates hand wheel or
to be ground. Fastens crankshaft
sets and starts automatic controls to bring
accurately in position on machine using
grinding wheel in contact with work.
chucks, fixtures, and other devices and
Checks progress of grinding with
sets portion to be ground, using dial
measuring instruments and gauges for
indicator, marking block or otherwise.
accuracy. May balance dress or change
Selects appropriate type and quality of
grinding wheel, stone or abrasive. May oil
grinding wheel and fits it on machine
and clean machine.
spindle. Adjusts guides stops and other
controls to determine limit of work and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
grinding wheel movements. Selects
Code 7224
rotation speed of wheel and starts
Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
machine. Manipulates hand wheels of
and Tool Sharpeners
machine and brings rotating grinding
wheel in touch with crankshaft journal or
7224.0102
area to be ground. Regulates flow of
VOLUME II B 111
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
coolant over ground portion. Observes CYLINDRICAL GRINDER or INTERNAL
progress of grinding to prescribed GRINDER as appropriate. May set or
accuracy and finish. Stops machine adjust grinding wheel distance for
periodically and checks for accuracy using different operations. May clean and oil
micrometre or set gauges. Removes machine.
crankshaft when grinding is over and
repeats operations on other portions as ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
required. May make simple adjustments Code 7224
to machine. May clean and oil machine. Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
and Tool Sharpeners
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7224 R/RM/O Classification: R
Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
and Tool Sharpeners 7224.0400
Surface Grinder
7224.0300
Roll Grinder Surface Grinder grinds flat surfaces of
machined metal objects to required finish
Roll Grinder grinds shafts, rollers, and thickness by surface grinding
commutator etc., to accurate finish for machine. Studies drawings and other
various mechanical purposes by specifications for nature of grinding
centreless, cylindrical or universal grinding operations required. Selects appropriate
machine. Studies drawing and other grinding wheel and fits it on machine
specifications of parts to be ground. spindle. Places work in position on
Selects and mounts appropriate abrasive magnetic chuck on the machine. Sets
wheels on machine. Turns hand wheel to required speed of grinding wheel and feed
adjust gap between rims of wheels of machine and adjust guides and stops to
according to diameter of part to be control to and fro travel of machine table.
ground. Moves levers to select Starts machine and brings grinding wheel
appropriate speeds for each wheel. Sets into contact with work. Applies cut and
feed guide to guide work into position observes progress of operation. Stops
between two wheel rims and clamps coil machine and measure work as necessary
guide properly to receive work from to ensure required accuracy. Removes
between wheel rims. Starts machine and work from machine when grinding
feeds work on to feed guide or keeps completed. May operate horizontal or
hopper filled with objects that are vertical spindle surface grinding machine.
automatically fed between wheels. May oil and clean machine.
Observes progress of work and checks
periodically ground parts with micrometre ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
or gauge to ensure that they conform to Code 7224
prescribed specifications. May do Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
cylindrical grinding of parallel, step and and Tool Sharpeners
taper shafts and internal bores set
between centres or otherwise by 7224.0401
processes of traverse plunge or angular
Grinder – Hand held and Power
grinding and be designated as
Tools
VOLUME II B 112
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Grinder – Hand held and Power Tools 7224.0500
selects appropriate grinding equipment, Thread Grinder
tools and methods to suit work
requirements, preparing the tools,
Thread Grinder finishes accurately threads
applying grinding procedures for carrying
of precision bolts, taps etc. by thread
out the grinding operations, inspecting
grinding machine. Studies blue print for
the components after grinding operations
pitch and other specifications of threads
and correcting faults.
to be ground. Adjusts wheel of grinding
machine and dresses grinding wheel to
Qualification Pack Details:
required pitch and cross-sectional shape
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0302 of thread to be ground. Checks ground
QP NOS Name Grinder – Hand held wheel with gauges to ensure accuracy.
and Power Tools Mounts grinding wheel on spindle of
NSQF Level 3 machine and sets it to required, grinding
operation. Mounts threaded work piece
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: to be ground on machine and fastens it
Code 7224 securely. Adjusts proper gears in feed
Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders mechanism of machine to give threads
and Tool Sharpeners specified pitch. Sets prescribed speed and
feed of machine. Starts machine, and
7224.0402 applies cut by matching ground wheel and
Operator-Conventional Surface thread on work piece perfectly. Observes
operation as first cut is completed. Stops
Grinding Machines
machine and returns wheel to original
position. Checks dimensions of finished
Operator-Conventional Surface Grinding
threads using measuring instruments and
Machines carries out the grinding
gauges. Makes adjustments, if necessary,
operations, in accordance with approved
and repeats operation until thread is
procedures, using different grinding
properly ground. May clean and oil
machines (e.g. horizontal or vertical
machines.
surface, cylindrical or universal grinding
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machines).
Code 7224
Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
Qualification Pack Details:
and Tool Sharpeners
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0109
QP NOS Name Operator-
7224.0600
Conventional
Honer/Honing Machine Operator
Surface Grinding
Machines
NSQF Level 2 Honer grinds internal surface of bores and
cylinders to accurate mirror like finish
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: with honing machine. Mounts ground
cylinder accurately in position on
Code 7224
machine, using clamps, jigs and other
Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
fixtures. Selects appropriate honing stick
and Tool Sharpeners
(abrasive tool) and clamps it on spindle of
machine. Aligns cylinder accurately so that
VOLUME II B 113
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
honing tool goes smoothly inside cylinder metal surface to attain high degree of
bore. Sets machine to feed and rotate polish and accurate finish.
hone at appropriate speed and starts
machine. Expands tool to required ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
diameter and manipulates hand wheel to Code 7224
feed tool into cylinder. Engages automatic Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
feed that oscillates hone within cylinder and Tool Sharpeners
and regulates supply of cutting lubricant
over honing tool. Checks progress of 7224.0701
honing as required with measuring
Super Finishing Technician
instruments and makes necessary
adjustments to ensure accuracy. Removes
Super finishing Technician Level 4 is a
work when honing is completed. May do
skilled operator. The role covers
internal grinding of cylinders and bores.
operations of different machine tools
May oil and clean machine.
performed both manually and through
automatic/CNC machines/manually and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
all kinds of activities like burnishing,
Code 7224
lapping, buffing and in-line inspection
Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
activities for quality verification, adhoc
and Tool Sharpeners
repair work, change of worn out parts and
gauging activities.
7224.0700
Lapper Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q4301
Lapper smoothens hardened flat, QP NOS Name Super Finishing
cylindrical, spherical or other metal Technician
surfaces mechanically or manually to NSQF Level 4
glossy finish by rubbing surfaces with fine
abrasives. Examines drawings and other ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
specifications of part to be lapped and
Code 7224
selects appropriate abrasive dust. Fits
Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
lapping wheel and sets object to be
and Tool Sharpeners
lapped on machine. Applies abrasive dust
on metal surface and wheel and starts
7224.0801
machine. Brings metal objects in contact
Polisher
with lapping wheel or holds work by hand
over lapping wheel and polishes surface to
Polisher polishes metal articles such as
required finish. Applies abrasive
household utensils, vases etc. to high
compound where necessary to attain high
finish on polishing spindle with abrasives
degree of finish. Smoothens or polishes
and polishing tools. Fixes article on
surface for set period. Removes metal and
suitable adapter screwed to spindle. Starts
cleans it in special liquids. May do hand
motor to rotate spindle and adjusts article
lapping by enclosing object in container
on adapter to run concentric. Presses fine
and vigorously rubbing by hand top plate
emery paper on article to glossen surface.
of container with abrasive compound on
Improves texture and attains high polish
by manipulating polishing tool against
VOLUME II B 114
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
article. May also polish silver and costly furnace when they have attained required
wares with buff for still higher finish. heat and places them in vats of prepared
chemical solution. Removes metal objects
Qualification Pack Details: from chemical bath when bluing is
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0113 completed and washes them in oil.
QP NOS Name Polisher – Machine
NSQF Level 2 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7224
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
Code 7224 and Tool Sharpeners
Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
and Tool Sharpeners 7224.9900
Metal Wheel Grinder, Polishing and
7224.0900 Tool Sharpeners, Other
Saw Grinder, Hand
Metal Wheel Grinders, Polishers and Tool
Saw Grinder, Hand sharpens teeth of Sharpeners, Other include all other Metal
different kinds of saws by filing and Grinders, Polishers and Tool Sharpeners
slightly bending them in required engaged in grinding and polishing knives,
direction. Examines dull saw blade and cutlery, choppers, domestic appliances
determines extent of grinding and and such other items and tools, not
mending of saw teeth required. Fixes saw elsewhere classified.
blade of wooden cramp and grinds each
saw tooth individually with triangular file. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Feels sharpness by touch and bends saw Code 7224
teeth alternately or as designed using Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
hammer and sawage or special pliers. May and Tool Sharpeners
make saws by cutting fresh teeth and
fixing handle in new or used blades.
Group 723
Machinery Mechanics and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Repairers
Code 7224
Title Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders
and Tool Sharpeners Machinery mechanics and repairers fit,
install, maintain and repair engines,
7224.1100 vehicles, agricultural or industrial
machinery and similar mechanical
Metal Bluer
equipment.
Metal Bluer imparts blue finish to metal
Occupations in this Group are classified
object to make them resistant and to
into the following Families:
improve their appearance. Packs metal
objects in bone or chemical and places
7231 Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
them in furnace. Regulates heat to bring
Repairers
furnace to desired temperature and
7232 Aircraft Engine Mechanics and
ascertains it by means or pyrometer or
Repairers
otherwise. Removes metal object from
VOLUME II B 115
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7233 Agricultural and Industrial parts of gear box, rear axle, steering
Machinery Mechanics and mechanism etc. and sets them right
Repairers ensuring correct alignment, clearance,
meshing of gears, specified movements
7234 Bicycle and Related Repairers
and operations. Relines and builds brakes,
sets wheel alignment, adjust, steering,
clutch, hand brakes etc. fits new or
Family 7231
repaired accessories and body parts,
Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
makes electrical connection, and performs
Repairers
other tasks to effect repairs. Lubricates,
joints, tightens loose parts, tests
Motor vehicle mechanics and repairers fit, performance of vehicle by driving on road
install, maintain, service and repair and makes necessary adjustments to
engines and the mechanical and related attain desired standard. May assemble
equipment of passenger cars, delivery complete vehicle from finished
trucks, motorcycles and other motor components.
vehicles.
Qualification Pack Details:
7231.0100 QP NOS Reference
QP NOS Name
Mechanic, Automobile
NSQF Level
Mechanic, Automobile repairs overhauls
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and services motor vehicles to keep them
Code 7231
in good running condition. Examines
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
vehicle to ascertain nature and location of
Fitters
defects either by running engine or driving
vehicle on road. Dismantles partially or
completely defective unit or parts of
7231.0101
vehicle such as engine, gear box, rear axle,
front axle, steering assembly, radiator, Maintenance Technician-Service
etc. according to nature of repairs to be Workshop
done, using hoist, jack, pullers, hand tools
and other devices. Measures essential
Maintenance Technician maintains and
parts like cylinder, bores piston, sizes
manages tools and equipment used in the
crank pins etc. using gauges, micrometre
workshop.
and other precision tools and gets
cylinders re-bored, liners filled, valve seats
Qualification Pack Details:
refaced, bearings re-metalled etc. as
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1601
necessary. Repairs or overhauls and
QP NOS Name Maintenance
assembles engine by performing tasks
Technician-Service
similar to those of Mechanic Petrol or
Workshop
Diesel Engine such as replacing defective
NSQF Level 4
parts, scrapping bearings, grinding valves,
setting timing, cleaning injectors, tuning
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
carburettor etc. according to maker's
Code 7231
specification. Replaces or repairs defective
VOLUME II B 116
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and Automotive Body Technician Level
Fitters 4
7231.0102
Automotive Body Technician is
AC Specialist
responsible for repair of vehicles and for
carrying out work on the body and frame
AC Specialist is responsible for installing, of a vehicle following the manufacturer’s
servicing and repairing an air conditioning repair procedures.
system of a vehicle. The individual also
performs routine maintenance of the Qualification Pack Details:
various components associated with the
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1405
air-conditioning system of the vehicle.
QP NOS Name Automotive Body
Technician Level 4
Qualification Pack Details:
NSQF Level 4
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1409
QP NOS Name AC Specialist ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
NSQF Level 4
Code 7231
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Fitters
Code 7231
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and 7231.0105
Fitters
Brake Specialist
7231.0103
Brake Specialist is responsible for
Automotive Body Technician Level
performing diagnostic tests and
3 determining common problems occurring
in the Braking and allied systems. The
Automotive Body Technician is individual also repairs and replaces
responsible for assisting in repair of various components/aggregates in the
vehicles and carrying out work on the braking system of the vehicle, and
body and frame of a vehicle following the performs routine
manufacturer’s repair procedures. maintenance of various
components/aggregates within the
Qualification Pack Details: Braking system.
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1410
QP NOS Name Automotive Body Qualification Pack Details:
Technician Level 3 QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1414
NSQF Level 3 QP NOS Name Brake Specialist
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7231 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and Code 7231
Fitters Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
7231.0104 Fitters
7231.0106
VOLUME II B 117
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Clutch Specialist Auto Service Technician Level 3 assists in
service, maintenance and technical repair
Clutch Specialist is responsible for of vehicles.
repairing and replacing the clutch
assembly and related parts. The individual Qualification Pack Details:
also performs routine maintenance of QP NOS Reference ASC/Q 1401
various components/aggregates within QP NOS Name Auto Service
the Clutch assembly including the Technician Level 3
pressure plate/clutch plates. NSQF Level 3
Qualification Pack Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1415 Code 7231
QP NOS Name Clutch Specialist Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
NSQF Level 4 Fitters
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 7231.0200
Code 7231 Engine Tester
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
Fitters Engine Tester, Automobile; Test Bed
Mechanic, Automobile tests performance
7231.0107 of newly assembled automobile engines
Auto Service Technician-Mechanic before fitting them on chassis. Mounts
motor on test bed with hoist and clamps it
Auto Service Technician Level 4 is securely in position with nuts and bolts.
responsible for the repair and routine Connects dynamometer/alternator to
servicing and maintenance (including crankshaft of engine, oil and fuel line,
electrical and mechanical aggregates) of controls, and other accessories adjusts
vehicles. tappets, starts engine, sets air-fuel ratio
and performs precise tune up operations.
Qualification Pack Details: Runs engine for specified period at
different speed and observes
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q 1402
performance, unusual noises knocks, etc.
QP NOS Name Auto Service
reads and records temperature, fuel
Technician Level 4
consumption, oil pressure, compression
NSQF Level 4
and power developed at certain speed
and other specification and calculates
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
torque, B.H.P thermal efficiency etc.
Code 7231
Passes engine to assembly line or reject, it
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
for return to disassembly. May rectify
Fitters
minor faults or report faults noticed.
7231.0108
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Auto Service Technician-Helper
Code 7231
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
Fitters
VOLUME II B 118
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7231.0201 observes performance for any unusual
Test Technician noise and knocks. Adjusts carburettor,
fuel pump (Carburettor for petrol engine
and fuel pump for diesel engine), sets
Test Technician is responsible for
clearance between tappets and valves,
conducting various types of tests inside
tunes engine, adjusts brakes, makes
the laboratory as well as supporting on
electrical connections and performs other
road testing. The role holder is
tasks to ensure stipulated performance.
responsible for setting the test apparatus
May repair and overhaul electric motors,
on the test bench, connecting the
fuel pump, carburettor etc. of engine.
aggregates/vehicle under test to the test
May weld, braze or solder parts. May
bench, support the engineer in taking
repair other agricultural machinery for
readings during tests procedures, making
ploughing, levelling, harvesting etc. and
minor modifications to the test setup and
be designated as MECHANIC,
keeping the test areas and apparatus in a
AGRICULTURAL MACHINES.
clean and working condition.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Qualification Pack Details:
Code 7231
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q/8401
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
QP NOS Name Test Technician
Fitters
NSQF Level 4
7231.0400
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Fitter Automobile
Code 7231
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
Fitters Fitter, Automobile attends to minor
repairs to motor vehicles under guidance
7231.0300 of Mechanic Automobile. Receives
instructions from Mechanic, Automobile
Tractor Mechanic
about tasks to attend. Jacks up vehicle to
required height for repair in convenient
Tractor Mechanic repairs and overhauls
position where necessary. Removes nuts
tractors by various mechanical processes
and bolts to dismantle parts such as water
for agriculture, constructional and other
pump assembly, fuel pumps assembly,
heavy duties. Examines and drives vehicle
distributor, carburettor, sparking plugs,
on road or runs engine in stationary
starter motors, generator, steering gear,
position to diagnose troubles and defects.
brakes, clutch, transmission and
Dismantles part or complete engine or
suspension systems, etc. Grinds valve and
unit according to nature of defects.
decarbonises cylinder head under
Repairs or replaces defective parts,
guidance of mechanic and changes oil of
reassembles them with prescribed
engines and transmission system. Tightens
settings, clearances, timings and
loose parts, lubricates joints, does minor
adjustments by further tooling as
repairs, replacements and adjustments
necessary and ensures accuracy of fit.
and performs simple fitting operations
Installs assembled or repaired engine
such as filing, chipping, grinding etc. May
securely in position on vehicle chassis and
work in workshops or garage. May drive
connects oil and fuel lines, controls and
vehicle on road. May be designated as
other accessories. Starts engine and
VOLUME II B 119
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
SERVICE MECHANIC if engaged in it on road. Dismantles parts such as
cleaning, polishing, oiling and greasing engine, ignition system, dynamo forks,
vehicles and do minor routine shock absorbers, gear box etc., as
adjustments as included in servicing. necessary. Grinds valves, sets timings,
relines brakes, re-bushes steering
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: mechanism, replaces worn out parts,
Code 7231 assembles gear box clutch etc. and
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and performs other tasks to effect repair,
Fitters cleans and sets carburettor, fits driving
chain, wheels silencer, kick, gear, clutch
7231.0401 and brake levers and other accessories.
Adjusts control cables for brake, clutch
Mechanic Fitter
and accelerator, sets tappets and wheel
alignment, tightens loose parts and makes
Mechanic/Fitter is responsible for repair,
necessary fittings and connections.
maintenance and overhaul of crushers,
Changes engine and gear box oil, starts
heavy earth moving machinery, medium
engine and tunes it up. Tests performance
and light vehicles, pumps and
of vehicle by driving on road and makes
compressors and other mechanical
further adjustments to remove defects
equipment and assemblies used in a mine.
noticed if any. May assemble motor cycle
A fitter most often works with/assists
or auto-rickshaws from assembled parts.
technicians who are more qualified and
experienced. The individual must be
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
trained to work safely and assure that
Code 7231
they can protect themselves and others
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
working around them from getting
Fitters
injured.
7231.0501
Qualification Pack Details: Auto Service Technician (Two and
QP NOS Reference MIN/Q0406 Three Wheelers)
QP NOS Name Mechanic/Fitter
NSQF Level 3 Auto Service Technician (two and three
wheelers) is responsible for the repairing
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and routine servicing and maintenance
Code 7231 (including electrical and mechanical
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and aggregates) of two/three wheeler
Fitters vehicles.
7231.0500 Qualification Pack Details:
Mechanic, Motor Cycle QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1411
QP NOS Name Auto Service
Technician (Two
Mechanic, Motor Cycle repairs, services
and Three
and overhauls motor cycles, auto-
Wheelers)
rickshaws, scooters; etc., to make and
NSQF Level 4
keep them roadworthy. Examines motor
cycle or scooter to locate faults by running
engine in stationary position or by driving
VOLUME II B 120
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: of brakes, draining gear box and oil pump,
Code 7231 removing and resetting road spring, etc.,
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and and are designated as Motor Mechanic
Fitters Helper, or Garage Boy according to nature
of work done.
7231.0900
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Cleaner Motor Vehicle
Code 7231
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
Cleaner, Motor Vehicle cleans and
Fitters
lubricates moving parts of motor cars,
trucks and other automatic vehicles and
performs various other related tasks. Fills
Family 7232
oil cans, grease guns with required type of
lubricant. Lubricates vehicles according to Aircraft Engine Mechanics and
charts, instructions, own judgement or Repairers
knowledge of type of vehicle to be
lubricated. Injects oil or grease into
Aircraft engine repairers and mechanics
various parts of engine or chassis. Inspects
fit, service, repair and overhaul aircraft
transmission, differential and rear axle
engines and assemblies, such as
casing and fills them with grease and oil.
airframes, hydraulic, and pneumatic
Cleans or replaces clogged or damaged
systems.
lubricators. Examines oil levels in gear
box, crankcase, steering box etc., and
7232.0100
drains out old oil and refills them with
Airframe Erector
good oil as required. Reports apparent
defects to Mechanic. May fill radiator with
water/coolant, check and fill distilled Airframe Erector assembles fuselage, tail,
water in battery, tighten loose parts such wings, under carriage, fuel tanks, doors
as bolts and nuts, repair flat types, mount etc. and installs plumbing pulley, pulley
tyres on wheel rims, inflate tyres and brackets and other airframe structural
perform other related duties as assigned. members according to approved
schedules. Studies blue print and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: approved assembly schedules. Assembles
airframe components, by supplementary
Code 7231
tooling where necessary using jigs,
Title Motor Vehicle Mechanics and
fixtures and other devices. Ensures correct
Fitters
fits, assembly, alignment and clearance
according to schedule, using feeler
7231.9900
gauges, micrometre etc. Secures members
Motor Vehicle Mechanics, Other
temporarily with fasteners, screws or by
tack welding and marks locations for rivet
Motor Vehicle Mechanics, other perform holes. Drills and countersinks holes in
number of routine and low skilled tasks in members for subsequent riveting, checks
repairing and overhauling motor vehicles operation of pneumatic and hydraulic
such as removing mudguards, bonnets systems, locates defects and rectifies
etc. to facilitate working, adjusting faults. Tests rigging and satisfactory
alternator and fan belt, assist in bleeding operation of aircraft control and ensures
VOLUME II B 121
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
airworthiness. Is designated as MECHANIC ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
AIRCRAFT AIRFRAME OVERHAULING if Code 7232
engaged in disassembling above parts and Title Aircraft Engine Mechanics and
reassembling them after necessary Repairers
repairs. May rivet parts together. May
replace, repair and modify passenger 7232.0300
galley and toilet structural parts. May
Engine Tester, Aircraft
maintain record of parts examined.
Engine Tester, Aircraft tests performance
of aeroplane engines by operating them
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
under controlled conditions, keeping
Code 7232
record of various meter readings taken at
Title Aircraft Engine Mechanics and
periodical intervals and interpreting data
Repairers
thus obtained. Prepares engine for tests
run. Dresses and installs engine on tests
7232.0200
bed, using chain hoist and fastens it
Mechanic Aircraft, Propeller securely to bed with clamps and other
fixtures. Connects oil and fuel lines,
Mechanic Aircraft Propeller installs, instruments, controls, and accessories.
repairs and sets aircraft propellers Connects propeller or dynamometer to
according to design for specified crankshaft pre oils, primes starts engine
displacement of air. Checks propeller used according to test run procedure. Runs it
on aircraft and ensures recommended for prescribed period at different specified
combinations, mandatory modifications speeds, locates defects and rectifies them.
and compliance with Directorate General Reads and records speed, temperature,
of Civil Aviation's requirements. Strips or fuel level, oil pressure, manifold pressure
dismantles propeller assembly, gets them and other data in log sheet. Calculates
properly cleaned and checks them for performance of engine at different speeds
size, shape, wear and tear, cracks and using slide rule, standard formula and
fatigue using precision instruments and curves and maintains data. Makes minor
other devices according to set procedure. repairs or adjustments to set engine to
Assembles propeller with spares, where required perfection. Maintains test house
necessary, according to instructions and equipment and calibrates tests fans.
approved schedules. Checks fits, Slushes engine and preserves for storage.
clearance, alignment of propeller blades
etc. and carries out balancing of ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
components of propeller assembly. Gets Code 7232
balancing done checked and approved by Title Aircraft Engine Mechanics and
appropriate authority and installs Repairers
propeller assembly on test rig to
administer tests and functional checks 7232.0400
such as blade angle, leak check, micro
Engine Tester, Helper, Aircraft
switch setting etc. as prescribed. May do
complete over-hauling of constant speed
Engine Tester Helper, Aircraft assists
units and get parts repaired or rectified in
Engine Tester in preparing and mounting
appropriate sections.
aircraft engine on test bed, and in starting
VOLUME II B 122
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
engine for performance test. Assists and adjustments before and after
Engine Tester in removing engine to test scheduled hours of flight. Examines
room and mounting it on test bed, using external appearance of engine and listens
hand tools, trucks, and hoists, connects oil to engine sound to detect malfunctioning.
and fuel line, instruments, controls and Times and adjusts engine and replaces
accessories. Cleans tools, performs other parts, such as tyres, wiring, instruments
duties as directed and maintains test bed. etc. using necessary tools. Inflates tyres,
May assist in rectifying defects, making fills gasoline tanks and oil reservoirs,
adjustments and recording various test greases moving parts and cleans motors
data. with rags. Starts and warms up motors
and taxis aeroplane into position for
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: servicing and loading, checks aeroplane
Code 7232 thoroughly before flight according to
Title Aircraft Engine Mechanics and schedule, trying brakes, operating
Repairers controls, reading instruments, checking
vital parts etc. And ensures that it is
7232.0500 absolutely fit for flight. Undertakes similar
checking of aeroplanes after scheduled
Mechanic Aircraft Engine, Field
hours of flight to assess airworthiness or
Service/Filed Mechanic Aircraft
necessary repairs. May disconnect and
remove engine from aeroplane for
Mechanic Aircraft Engine, FieldService,
overhaul. Proper operating order.
checks and detects faults, removes
Performs miscellaneous duties to service
defective parts, engines etc. from
engine such as flushing crankcase, clearing
aeroplane by disconnecting wiring and
strainer screens and greasing moving
accessories, installs new or repaired
parts etc. Installs new or overhauled
engines and parts and does final
engine in airplane, connects all part and
adjustments to prepare plane for test
wiring, checks and removes snags.
flights. Inspects and checks engine to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
locate defects. Disassembles engine and
Code 7232
accessories such as carburettor, fuel
Title Aircraft Engine Mechanics and
pump starters generators, ignition
Repairers
hammers, sparking plugs and other
hydraulic and electrical systems. Removes
7232.0600
engine for overhauling by disconnecting
Mechanic Aircraft, Engine
tubing, wiring and accessories, embolting
engine and lifting it from plane with chain Overhauling
hoist. Replaces or repairs defective or
worn out parts and makes necessary Mechanic Aircraft, Engine Overhauling
accessories and makes final inspection to repairs and overhauls aeroplane engines.
ensure they are in scheduled and prepares Examines engine mounted on aeroplane
plane for test flight. May assist Aircraft and listens to its idle running sound to
Maintenance Engineer in carrying out detect malfunctioning. Removes engine
routine maintenance as preapproved from airplane using hoist, necessary tools
inspection schedule. Aircraft test engine and equipment. Mounts it on work bench.
performance after aircraft had been Disassembles engine, cleans parts and
repaired in shed and does final settings examines them to ascertain repairs
VOLUME II B 123
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
needed. Repairs or replaces defective Agricultural and industrial machinery
parts and reassembles engine by setting mechanics and repairers fit, install,
timings, clearance, etc. according to examine, service and repair engines,
manufacturers' specifications. Balances agricultural and industrial machinery and
impellers and incorporates modifications mechanical equipment, except motor
as suggested. Runs engine to test vehicle, aircraft and electric motors.
performance, makes necessary
adjustments to carburettor, and tunes it 7233.0100
up precisely using feeler gauge, timing
Fitter, General
discs and other special tool, performs
other talks to service engine, such as
Fitter General sizes metal parts to close
flushing crank case, cleaning strainer
tolerances and fits and assembles them
screens, greasing moving parts etc. May
using hand tools for production or repairs
specialize in servicing and overhauling
of machines, or other metal products.
specific aircraft parts or unit such as
Studies drawings to understand
carburettor, propellers, landing gears,
specification of different parts, fittings or
wings, fuselage, etc. May operate
assembles to be made and their functions.
workshop machine for drilling, grinding,
Cuts and shapes required parts
milling etc. May keep record of parts
dimensions and specifications by
examined, repaired and replaced.
processes of sawing, clipping, filing,
grinding, drilling holes, screw cutting,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
scrapping etc., Assembles parts by
Code 7232
riveting, screwing, pinning etc. So as to
Title Aircraft Engine Mechanics and
make complete unit according to drawing.
Repairers
Dismantles or removes worn out, broken
or defective parts using hand tools and
7232.9900
replaces them by repaired or new ones.
Aircraft Mechanics, Other Tests completed article to ensure correct
performance. May do simple turning,
Aircraft Mechanics, other include all other planning and shaping of parts on
workers engaged in assembling and machines and perform welding, brazing,
repairing gliders and aircrafts either in annealing, hardening, tempering and, like
workshop or airport, not elsewhere operations. May specialize in particular
classified. type of machine or product and be
designated accordingly. May suggest
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: alterations.
Code 7232
Title Aircraft Engine Mechanics and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Repairers Code 7233
Title Agricultural and Industrial
Family 7233 Machinery Mechanics and
Agricultural and Industrial Repairers
Machinery Mechanics and
7233.0101
Repairers
Maintenance Fitter-Mechanical
VOLUME II B 124
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Maintenance Fitter-Mechanical Fitter Levelling, Alignment and
dismantles, removes and replaces faulty Balancing
equipment at component or unit level on
a variety of different types of mechanical
Fitter Levelling, Alignment and Balancing
assemblies and sub-assemblies and
ensures alignment of moving parts (e.g.
diagnosing, locating faults, overhauling,
Pumps, blowers, fans etc.).
fitting and adjusting mechanical systems
and equipment.
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0814
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Name Fitter Levelling,
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0213
Alignment &
QP NOS Name Maintenance Fitter-
Balancing
Mechanical
NSQF Level 3
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7233
Code 7233
Title Agricultural and Industrial
Title Agricultural and Industrial
Machinery Mechanics and
Machinery Mechanics and
Repairers
Repairers
7233.0200
7233.0102
Fitter, Bench
Iron and Steel-Machinist
Fitter, Bench; Viceman sizes metal
Iron and Steel-Machinist identifies the
accurately to required dimension by
sequence of machining operations
sawing, chipping, filing, etc. using hand
required to fabricate product component
tools for making specimens or finished
required to fabricate product components
components. Studies drawing or measures
by studying their designs/sample parts
sample to record dimensions of part to be
and fabricating the components using the
made. Holds specified material in vice and
appropriate tools and dies.
sizes it by processes of sawing, chipping
and filing. Measures object while working
Qualification Pack Details:
using foot rule, callipers, gauges etc. and
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0802 checks for correct filing with square. Gets
QP NOS Name Iron & Steel- half-finished objects marked or marks it
Machinist using face plate, marking block scriber,
NSQF Level 3 Vernier, height gauges, vice-blocks, angle
plate, sine plate, slip gauges, combination
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: set, etc. depending on accuracies
Code 7233 required, to indicate guide lines for
Title Agricultural and Industrial finished sizes, holes to be drilled and pitch
Machinery Mechanics and centres, threads to be cut and other
Repairers working details as specified in drawing or
sample. Clamps object securely in correct
7233.0121 position in vice and files it to required
dimensions according to punch marks and
VOLUME II B 125
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
guide lines frequently measuring it with carburettor, fan belt etc. and connects it
clippers, micrometre, Vernier, gauges etc.. to propulsion drive. Starts engine, tunes it
Drills holes with hand drill, cuts threads precisely and runs it at prescribed or set
with taps and dies ensuring that they are standard making necessary adjustments.
square or at required angle to base. Observes different readings such as
Measure finished article with dial temperature, fuel level, oil pressure etc.
indicator, micrometre, Vernier, height for optimum performance. Checks, adjusts
gauges, screw gauges, plug gauges, sine and lubricates equipment periodically and
plate slip gauge, etc. according to performs other operations to keep engine
prescribed accuracies. May make parts in good working order. May rebore
separately and assemble them screws, engine, reface valve seats, anneal pipes,
rivets, pins, etc. as specified. May check braze or solder parts etc.
dimension with shadow graph. May be
designated as FITTER TOOL ROOM or Filer ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
according to nature of work done. Code 7233
Title Agricultural and Industrial
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Machinery Mechanics and
Code 7233 Repairers
Title Agricultural and Industrial
Machinery Mechanics and 7233.0301
Repairers Bearing Maintenance
7233.0300
Bearing Maintenance, identify the
Mechanic, Petrol Engine problems in the equipment, rectify the
root causes for leakages, replaces the
Mechanic, Petrol Engine; Petrol Engine bearings, lubricates the bearings, ensures
Fitter, locates defects, repairs, and fitness of all types of bearings in the plant
overhauls stationary petrol engines for and carry out routine maintenance.
correct performance to drive pumps,
generators, propulsion shafts, etc., checks
engine to locate defects. Dismantles or Qualification Pack Details:
partly dismantles it according to nature of QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0816
defects and measures essential parts such QP NOS Name Bearing
as cylinder bore, crank pins, pistons etc., Maintenance
using cylinder gauge, micrometre and NSQF Level 3
other appropriate tools. Gets cylinders
rebored, valve seats refaced and liners ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
filled if necessary. Fits and taps pistons in
Code 7233
cylinders, decarbonises cylinder head and
Title Agricultural and Industrial
grinds valves using appropriate abrasives.
Machinery Mechanics and
Replaces or repairs worn out or damaged
Repairers
parts and assembles them, doing
supplementary tolling as necessary to
7233.0400
ensure accuracy of fit. Installs assembled
Mechanic, Diesel Engine
or repaired engine in position, sets
timings, fits accessories, adjusts tappets,
VOLUME II B 126
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Mechanic, Diesel Engine; Oil Engine Fitter Code 7233
repairs services and overhauls diesel or oil Title Agricultural and Industrial
engines for efficient performance as Machinery Mechanics and
prime mover to drive machinery and Repairers
equipment. Examines engine to locate
defects, using various tools and 7233.0402
instruments. Dismantles or partly Conveyor Operation and
dismantles it to remove damaged or worn
Maintenance
out parts and replaces or repairs them.
Grinds valve and assembles parts, doing
Conveyor Operation and Maintenance
supplementary tooling and other
inspects the total belt driving system
functions as necessary to ensure accuracy
including the controls of conveyer belt as
of fit. Installs assembled or repaired
per the required sequence for feeding
engine in position and connects pulley or
different raw materials (coal, limestone,
wheel to propulsion system. Starts engine,
iron ore etc.) in the service bunker
tunes it up and observes performance
through crushers/screener etc. This also
noting different meter readings such as
involves basic maintenance and
temperature, fuel level, oil pressure, etc.
troubleshooting of the conveyer belt
and sets it to specified standard for
system.
optimum performance. Checks, adjusts
and lubricates engine periodically and
Qualification Pack Details:
performs such other functions to keep
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0008
engine in good working order. May solder
QP NOS Name Conveyor Operation
or braze parts and service diesel fuel
and Maintenance
pumps and injectors.
NSQF Level 3
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7233
Code 7233
Title Agricultural and Industrial
Title Agricultural and Industrial
Machinery Mechanics and
Machinery Mechanics and
Repairers
Repairers
7233.0600
7233.0401
Mechanic, Gas/Diesel Engine
Belt Conveyor Maintenance
Mechanic, Gas Engine checks, adjusts,
Belt Conveyor Maintenance maintains
repairs and overhauls gas engines to
conveyor system including belts, idlers
ensure desired performance. Examines
motors, interlocking belts, bunkers and
engine to check supply of gas, ignition
control systems.
system, exhaust pipe, crank bearings etc.,
to locate causes of defective operation.
Qualification Pack Details:
Dismantles part or complete engine
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0812
according to nature of defects, repairs or
QP NOS Name Belt Conveyor
replaces defective and worn out parts and
Maintenance
reassembles engine with prescribed
NSQF Level 3
settings, timing and adjustments by
further tooling as necessary, checks entire
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
lubrication system, ensure requisite flow
VOLUME II B 127
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
of oil and lubricates all points. Turns 7233.0701
engine to check compressions, ensures Mobile Equipment Maintenance
correct operation of compression release
lever and starts engine. Observes
Mobile Equipment Maintenance carries
performance and makes further settings
routine maintenance, identifying the
and adjustments if necessary to ensure
problems, rectifying the root causes and
correct operation. May repair air or gas
ensuring the fitness of all moving
compressors and gas producer plant.
equipment, for e.g. Mobile Cranes,
Dumper, Forklift etc.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7233 Qualification Pack Details:
Title Agricultural and Industrial
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0815
Machinery Mechanics and
QP NOS Name Mobile Equipment
Repairers
Maintenance
NSQF Level 3
7233.0700
Mechanic, Earth Moving Machinery ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7233
Mechanic, Earth Moving Machinery Title Agricultural and Industrial
repairs, services and overhauls earth Machinery Mechanics and
moving machines such as Bull-dozers, Repairers
scraper, dumpier, power-shovel, dredger,
dragline, etc., studies manufacturer’s 7233.0800
instructions for dismantling and repair
Mechanic, Road Roller
work. Examines and drives vehicle to
locate defects. Sets right minor defects by
Mechanic, Road-Roller repairs and
cleaning, resetting and adjusting
overhauls engine transmission system,
carburettor, fuel pump, injector, plugs,
chassis components and accessories of
fuel line, electrical circuits etc. Dismantles
light or heavy road roller to ensure
part or complete engine or defective unit
efficient performance. Inspects and tests
according to nature of defects and
road rollers to locate defects. Dismantles
replaces or repairs damaged and worn out
engine and other sub-assemblies, partly or
parts. Assembles repaired unit or engine,
completely according to nature of defects.
sets timings, clearances etc. and makes
Repairs or replaces damaged parts of
necessary adjustments according to
different sub-assemblies fuel injections
specifications by doing supplementary
performing simple machine and fitting
tooling as necessary to ensure accuracy of
operations where required. Checks
it. Fits accessories, components and frame
condition of engine parts such as piston,
to vehicle.
rings, valves, steam whistle, reversing
gear, auto-positive injector in steam
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
engine or plunger, governor, atomiser etc.
Code 7233
in case of diesel engine and replaces
Title Agricultural and Industrial
damaged parts. Refits or assembles
Machinery Mechanics and
components or unit, sets timings, fuel
Repairers
injection, clearances etc. and tests
performance. Changes oil in engines and
VOLUME II B 128
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
transmission systems and lubricates turbine blades. May operate turbine. May
running parts and joints. Tightens loose repair and service mechanical equipment
parts, makes necessary adjustments and in power house. May oil and grease
performs other tasks to keep vehicle in lubricating points of plant (turbo
good working condition. Runs engine or alternator or turbo-generator) and
drives vehicle on yard to check and ensure equipment. May erect turbine alternators
that all mechanical systems are or generators under guidance of
functioning properly. May braze, solder Mechanical or Electrical Engineer in power
and weld parts. May drives vehicle on houses.
road. May specialize in diesel or steam
road rollers. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7233
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Agricultural and Industrial
Code 7233 Machinery Mechanics and
Title Agricultural and Industrial Repairers
Machinery Mechanics and
Repairers 7233.1000
Mechanic, Stationery Steam Engine
7233.0900
Mechanic, Turbine Mechanic, Stationary Steam Engine
repairs, services and overhauls steam
Mechanic, Turbine; Fitter, Turbine reports engine for correct performance. Examines
irregularities, removes defects and steam pipes, joints, valves etc. to
overhauls turbines under guidance of ascertain nature and location of defects
Electrical Engineer or Mechanical Engineer and dismantles them partly or wholly as
Maintenance Dismantles turbines and necessary to remove damaged or worn
their components according to out parts. Replaces or repairs damaged
manufacturer's instructions using hoisting and worn part by remitting, filling,
equipment under guidance of grinding and scraping etc. and measures
Electrical/Mechanical Engineer, examines them for size to ensure functional
parts for any damaged or defects and accuracy. Checks alignments with gauges
repairs or replaces damage parts by filing, and spirit level and assembles parts and
chipping, drilling, grinding, scraping etc., complete unit doing supplementary
as necessary. Checks level, alignment etc. tooling as necessary to ensure accuracy of
and changes bearings, shafts and related fit. Tests reassembled equipment, sets
parts of generator where necessary. Refits valves, adjusts control and makes
parts ensuring correct adjustments, necessary adjustments. Starts engine,
clearance, function level alignment, etc., observes gauges and meters to ascertain
as per manufacturer’s instructions. Starts engine performance, balances etc. and
turbine and observes performance by makes further adjustments if necessary.
watching and listening to unusual sounds, Checks, adjusts lubricates working parts,
leakage, knocks etc. and reports defects tightens loose parts and performs other
to superiors for rectification. May connect servicing tasks periodically to keep engine
water/steam channel from in good running condition. Reports to
penstock/steam pine to turbine for flow Mechanical Engineer of any service
of water/stream at high pressure to drive defects noticed for rectification. May keep
VOLUME II B 129
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
record of parts examined and engine periodically or gets it done and performs
performance. May erect and install other tasks to maintain plan in proper
equipment. May operate or drive steam working order. May maintain records of
engine. parts examined, repairs done,
replacements made and plant
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: performance. May erect and install
Code 7233 equipment under the guidance of
Title Agricultural and Industrial Chemical Engineer.
Machinery Mechanics and
Repairers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7233
7233.1100 Title Agricultural and Industrial
Mechanic, Maintenance, Chemical Machinery Mechanics and
Repairers
Plant/Technician, Maintenance,
Chemical Plant
7233.1200
Millwright
Mechanic Maintenance (Chemical Plant);
repairs and overhauls chemical plant,
Mill Wright; Mechanic Maintenance,
machinery and equipment periodically
General repairs and overhauls workshop
and on break downs to maintain them in
machines and equipment periodically and
efficient operating condition. Studies
on break downs to maintain them in
methods of processing of raw material to
working condition. Examines machines
finished products. Examines plant and
and equipment to ascertain nature and
equipment to locate faults and removes
location of defects. Dismantles unit partly
minor defects on spot. Reports major
or completely using hand tools, adopters,
defects and break downs to Chemical
twists, dollies, roller etc., as necessary, at
Engineer and dismantles defective unit as
spot or after shifting to mill wright section
directed with necessary precaution, using
according to nature of defects and
hand tools, adopter, twists etc. as
removes damaged and worn out parts.
necessary. Replaces or repairs defective
Obtains replacements or repairs defective
parts and components by re-metalling,
parts by re-metalling, chipping, machining,
filling, drilling, grinding, scraping,
filing, scraping, drilling, screwing, grinding
soldering, brazing, etc. as required and
etc. and assembles them with
reassembles unit according to
supplementary tolling as necessary
specifications with prescribed precautions
ensuring accuracy of fit, alignments,
particularly for explosive, gas acid and
prescribed clearances and functional
other chemical plants, ensuring correct
efficiency. Tests reassembled equipment
alignment clearance, valve operations,
and makes necessary adjustments. Installs
adjustments, flow of material operational
machines and equipment in correct
functions and other necessary details.
position and aligns power shifting and
Tests assembled unit for proper
pulleys using plumbs bobs, thread line
performance, makes further adjustments,
spirit level etc. as necessary. Checks,
if necessary and gets assembled if
adjusts and lubricates equipment
examined by appropriate authority before
periodically or directs helper to do so and
handing over to production. Checks,
maintains them in working order. May
adjusts and lubricates equipment
VOLUME II B 130
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
work in various industries on plant and Plumber (Pumps and E/M Mechanic) is
equipment peculiar to those industries. responsible for installation and repair of
May specialize in repairing particular Pumps and E/M equipment used for
types of machines or equipment in different plumbing applications of
premises. housing, commercial and institutional
setups.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7233 Qualification Pack Details:
Title Agricultural and Industrial QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0111
Machinery Mechanics and QP NOS Name Plumber (Pumps &
Repairers E/M Mechanic)
NSQF Level 4
7233.1300
Mechanic, Pump ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7233
Mechanic Pump repairs all types of pumps Title Agricultural and Industrial
such as centrifugal, plunger types etc., Machinery Mechanics and
according to specifications for pumping Repairers
water, oil, air etc., Dismantles pump using
hand tools and examines mechanism to 7233.1400
locate faults or damage, Repairs defective Mechanic, Dairy Maintenance
parts or obtains replacements, sets them
in position and assembles pump. Tests Mechanic, Dairy Maintenance repairs and
reassembled or repaired unit for pressure, services dairy equipment to maintain
leakage etc., makes necessary adjustment them in working condition. Repairs and
and observes performance for services bottle and can-washers, soakers,
appropriate yield of air, oil or water. May butter and cheese packing and sealing
erect and install pumps at site and equipment, pasteurizers milk evaporators,
connect to motor power. May locate etc. replaces defective wiring, burnt fuses,
faults to electric system motor repaired worn switches and connects electric
such as rewinding of field coils or motors. Repairs and installs pumps, fits
armatures by Electrician or Armature water and gas pipes and repairs leaky
Winder. May specialize in repairing joints by general fitting operation, using
centrifugal or reciprocating pumps. hand tools or by simple welding, as
necessary. May clean and re-assemble
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: refrigeration units, regulate boiler supply
Code 7233 pressure and mend leaky steam pipes and
Title Agricultural and Industrial joints by simple welding.
Machinery Mechanics and
Repairers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7233
7233.1301 Title Agricultural and Industrial
Plumber (Pumps and E/M Machinery Mechanics and
Mechanic) Repairers
7233.1500
VOLUME II B 131
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Mechanic, Mining Machinery Dismantles equipment partly or
completely according to nature of defects
Mechanic, Mining Machinery repairs and removes damaged or worn out parts.
services and overhauls drilling, scraping, Repairs defective parts, if possible, by
cutting, winding, hoisting and other various mechanical processes such as re-
mining machinery for correct metalling, riveting, filing, grinding,
performance. Get, defective machine or scraping etc. or obtains replacements.
equipment removed from surface or Assembles parts doing supplementary
underground working place to repair tooling as required to ensure accuracy of
section, using slippers, roller, hoists etc. as fit and specified functions. Tests
necessary. Examines faulty equipment to reassembled equipment and makes
ascertain nature and location of defects. necessary adjustments for required
Dismantles equipment partly or performance. Checks, adjusts and
completely to remove damaged and worn lubricates equipment periodically or gets
out parts. Repairs parts by various it done and performs such other tasks to
mechanical processes such as re- keep machinery in good working order.
metalling, filing, chipping, scrapping, May keep record of parts examined and
grinding etc. or obtains replacements. equipment performance. May weld, braze
Assembles parts, doing supplementary and solder parts. May erect and install
tooling as necessary and ensures correct textile machinery and equipment. May
fit, movement, clearance, adjustments, operate lathes, milling and smoothening
functional operations etc. as specified. machines and perform general fitting
Tests reassembled equipment making work. May specialize in particular type of
necessary adjustments for optimum textile machinery such as carding,
performance. Checks, adjusts and spinning, weaving, sizing etc.
lubricates equipment periodically or gets
it done and performs other tasks to keep ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
equipment in good working order. May Code 7233
undertake minor repairs at working place. Title Agricultural and Industrial
May weld, braze or solder parts. Machinery Mechanics and
Repairers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 7233.1700
Code 7233 Mechanic, Printing Machinery
Title Agricultural and Industrial
Machinery Mechanics and Mechanic, Printing Machinery repairs,
Repairers services and overhauls printing machinery
such as linotype, monotype, rotary, letter
7233.1600 press etc. for efficient performance.
Mechanic, Textile Machinery Examines faulty equipment to ascertain
nature and location of defects. Dismantles
Mechanic, Textile Machinery repairs equipment partly or completely to
services and overhauls weaving, spinning, remove damaged or worn out parts using
hosiery and other textile machines and hand tools, hoist etc. as necessary.
equipment to maintain them in working Repairs parts by filing, grinding etc. or
order and ensure correct performance. obtaining replacement. Assemble parts,
Examines equipment to locate defects. doing supplementary tooling such as
VOLUME II B 132
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
filing, drilling, grinding etc. as necessary adjustments of position of screws, nuts,
and ensures accuracy of fit. Operates and levers, needle bar, rockers, etc. Stitches,
tests reassembled machine, makes trial piece of cloth and makes further
necessary adjustments and ensured that adjustments, if necessary. Cleans and oils
types are uniform and it is running to machine periodically for smooth
specified accuracy. Checks, adjusts and performance. May specialize in
lubricates equipment periodically or gets overhauling and repairing domestic and
it done and performs other tasks to keep power driven commercial and industrial
it in good working condition. Ensures that sewing machines. May visit residences or
lead casting chamber, type casting unit premises to repair domestic sewing
and plunger mechanism of unit are machines at spot.
functioning properly to cast type of
required specification. May remove heavy Qualification Pack Details:
machines and machine units from QP NOS Reference AMH/Q1901
assembly line using hoisting equipment QP NOS Name Machine
for heavy repair. May operate printing Maintenance
machines on job work. May specialize in Mechanic-Sewing
servicing particular type of printing Machine
machines such as mono-casting, line NSQF Level 5
casting, rotary press, treadles, binding
machines etc. May keep record of parts ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
examined and equipment performance.
Code 7233
May be designated according to machine
Title Agricultural and Industrial
on which engaged such as MONOTYPE,
Machinery Mechanics and
LINOTYPE, INTER-TYPE, LITHO-BINDRY
Repairers
MACHINE.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7233.1900
Code 7233
Lamp Repairman, Mines
Title Agricultural and Industrial
Machinery Mechanics and
Lamp Repairman, Mines Lamp
Repairers
Cleaner/Mines; Lamp Fitter, repairs, tests,
cleans and changes safety lamp used
7233.1800
underground by miners. Checks safety
Mechanic, Sewing Machine
lamp parts such as gauge, chimney, glass,
wick, asbestos washer and fuse, head ring,
Mechanic Sewing Machine; Sewing cables, etc., in case of electric safety lamp
Machine, Repairman examines, adjusts for defects. Repairs or replaces parts and
repairs and services sewing machines for tests lighted lamp for safety by blowing
proper performance. Examines faulty round top and bottom of gauge and glass
machines to ascertain nature and location to ensure that flame is not exposed.
of defects. Dismantles machine partly or Cleans safety lamps by holding them
completely to remove damaged and worn against felt lined rotating wheel, adds
out parts. Repairs defective parts or chemicals and changes small batteries
obtains replacements. Assembles parts after each shift. Issues lamps locked and
and tests machine for desired lighted to miners and receives them back
performance by making necessary on return. May keep record of number of
VOLUME II B 133
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
men underground by number of lamps Title Agricultural and Industrial
issued. Machinery Mechanics and
Repairers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7233 7233.2100
Title Agricultural and Industrial Fitter, Stationery Steam Engine
Machinery Mechanics and
Repairers Fitter, Stationary Steam Engine fits and
assembles parts according to
7233.2000 manufacturer's instructions and assists
Mechanic, Repairman (Domestic Mechanic steam Engine in his work.
Appliances) Examines drawings and other
specifications, checks parts for flaws and
accuracy of fit using gauges, micrometres
Mechanic, Repairman, Domestic
and other measuring instruments and
Appliances services and repairs all types of
removes defects by chipping, filling,
small machinery and mechanical
scraping, grinding, drilling and other
appliances generally in domestic use by
supplementary tooling as necessary.
replacement and repairs of worn or
Assembles parts as directed using screw
damaged parts to ensure correct
drivers, pliers, spanners etc. tests
performance. Examines small machines
completed equipment and makes
and appliances such as heaters, geysers,
necessary adjustments under guidance of
coffee grinders, gramophones, pressure
Mechanic Steam Engine. May oil and
cookers, stoves etc. to ascertain nature
lubricate engine parts. May braze and
and location of defects. Dismantles
solder parts and assist in installing
equipment partly or completely to
equipment.
remove or replace damaged or worn out
parts. Repairs defective parts by setting
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
washers, filing, soldering, riveting etc. or
obtains replacements. Assembles parts to Code 7233
make complete unit ensuring accuracy of Title Agricultural and Industrial
fit by supplementary tooling as necessary. Machinery Mechanics and
Tests reassembled equipment and adjusts Repairers
nuts, screws etc. as necessary to ensure
its correct performance, fits assembly 7233.2200
frames or structures, installs appliances in Fitter, Marine
premises and gives power or water
connections. Checks, cleans, adjusts and Fitter, Marine repairs, services and
services equipment periodically to overhauls engines and accessories of
maintain them in working order. May ships, boats etc., under guidance of
specialize in repairing particular type of MARINE ENGINEER. Examines drawings
machine or equipment. May work in and other specifications. Checks and
workshop, factory, outdoor station or at measures parts for flaws and other
customer's residence. accuracy of fit using gauges, micrometres
etc., and removes defect by chipping,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: filing, scraping, grinding and does other
Code 7233 supplementary tooling as necessary.
VOLUME II B 134
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Assembles engines and auxiliary Gets bogey completely cleaned by
machinery in position using hoisting Khalasis, examines it for damages, cracks
equipment and other tools. Tests etc. and replaces cross members damaged
completed assembly and makes necessary and worn out parts of body using hand
adjustments, Dismantles partly or tools. Checks pivot pins, side bearings, etc.
completely such machinery in ship as to set and maintain necessary clearances.
propelling machinery, steam diesel or Checks condition of springs, brake fittings,
electric auxiliaries, pumps, cargo-handling buffers, etc. and repairs or replaces worn
machinery anchor-handling gear, out and damaged ones. Tests vacuum unit
ventilating and firefighting equipment, for vacuum pressure over testing
steering gear etc., removes and replaces machine, changes defective parts and
worn or damaged parts and reassembles resets them. Cleans and inspects wheel
them as per drawings under guidance of bearing and replaces them where
Marine Engineer using hand and portable necessary. Gets wheel machined, faced
tools. Installs below deck auxiliaries such and tyre set and refits wheel assembly
as evaporators, stills, heaters, pumps, using new parts such as keyways, guides,
condensers and boilers and connects space bars, etc. Examines condition of
them to steam pipe systems. Tests and coach work and replaces worn or
inspects installed machinery and corroded frames with new ones. Fits
equipment during dock and sea trials and various fittings to coaches such as doors,
removes defects, if any. May attend to windows, lamp and fan brackets, locker,
minor electrical defects. May assist in water closet fittings, places repaired or
keeping watch on engine, boiler and other overhauled coach over bogey using
machinery and assist in their operation. overhead crane, fastens and fits bogey to
coach by tightening bolts, nuts space bar,
connecting rods etc. and aligns and fits
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: metal frame and doors to waggons. May
Code 7233 specialize in erection of new coaches or
Title Agricultural and Industrial waggons or in conducting their periodical
Machinery Mechanics and overhauling. May attend to repairs of
Repairers coach and waggon buffers, vacuum brakes
etc. May keep record of parts examined.
7233.2300
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Fitter, Railway Carriage and
Code 7233
Waggon
Title Agricultural and Industrial
Machinery Mechanics and
Fitter Railway, Carriage and Waggon
Repairers
checks repairs and sets various metal
parts and units of railway coaches and
7233.2400
waggons to locate damage or worn out
Fitter, Loco
parts. Strips off wooden and metal
fixtures, removes outer shell or coach and
places it on wooden block using hoisting Fitter, Loco repairs locomotives and sets
equipment. Removes under-carriage them to working condition according to
frame, bogey, wheel assembly, vacuum instruction and guidance of Loco Foreman
units, springs, buffers etc. as required. Examines drawings and other
VOLUME II B 135
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
specification, checks parts for defects and in repairing, servicing and overhauling of
accuracy of fit, using gauges, micrometres particular units or components.
and other measuring instruments,
Dismantles units and components partly ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
or completely to remove damaged or Code 7233
worn out parts and repairs them or Title Agricultural and Industrial
obtains replacements. Assembles parts, Machinery Mechanics and
doing supplementary tooling as necessary Repairers
to ensure accuracy of fit. Uncouples all
parts and mechanism from wheel 7233.2500
assembly fitted to engine chassis or frame
Loco Cleaner
to get boilers mounted on frame free
from wheels. Directs Crane Operator to
Loco Cleaner; Cleaner Railway cleans loco
lift and places engine frame along with
engines and performs allied tasks in loco-
boiler over wooden stand or blocks. Sends
shed. Cleans engine and its parts using
wheel assembly and connected parts to
waste cotton and kerosene oil. Applies
machine shop for repairs or
white chalk or lime stone solution on
reconditioning of wheels, cross bars etc.
cleaned parts and strikes with hammer to
Unscrews nuts and bolts and removes all
check cracks if any. Moves engine
boiler mounting such as safety valve,
backward or forward with help of crow-
gland steam fountains, whistle pipes,
bars and turns it by pushing it on
smoke box fittings etc. Unscrews nuts and
mechanical device when required. Lights
bolts and removes all boiler mounting
up firebox, shovels coke in it. Drops fire by
such as safety valve, gland stem fountains,
shaking handle of fire-grate or operating
whistle pipes, smokes box fittings etc. Lifts
lever in engine and performs other tasks
boiler from frame by crane and sends it to
as guided. May oil and lubricate engine
boiler section for repairs and servicing.
parts. May be designated as ENGINE
Examines engine frame for damage,
LIGHTER if engaged only in lighting up
cracks and other defects and marks area
engine boiler and as FIRE-DROPPER,
for welding, riveting etc. as required.
ENGINE if engaged in dropping fire from
Checks piston, valves, cylinder etc. and
firebox of engine after completion of
gets cylinder bored to specific accuracy.
journey.
Repairs valve assembly, fits new rings and
assembles all parts and units according to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
specifications under guidance of Loco
Code 7233
Supervisor/Foreman. Tests reassembled
Title Agricultural and Industrial
parts, units for components and makes
Machinery Mechanics and
necessary adjustments. Checks, adjusts
Repairers
and lubricates parts and joints periodically
or directs helpers to do so and performs
7233.2600
other tasks under guidance of Loco
Foreman to keep loco engine and Fitter, Bicycle
equipment in good working order. May
keep record of parts examined and Fitter, Bicycle: Cycle Repairer repairs and
equipment performance. May specialize overhauls pedal cycles, perambulators etc.
in steam or diesel engine. May specialize by replacements, setting and adjusting
parts to keep them in good working
VOLUME II B 136
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
condition. Examines bicycle to ascertain except in presence of Signal Inspector.
nature and location of faults. Dismantles Cleans signal glasses, checks focus of
bicycle partly or completely to remove signal and colour lights periodically, sets
damaged and worn out parts. Repairs and keeps them correctly focussed and
defective parts or obtains replacements ensures that they are properly
and refits components in order of maintained, batteries cleaned and
sequence. Adjusts brakes, driving chain charged periodically at regular intervals
mechanism, wheels, handle bars etc. for and no one does any repairs or
correct alignment. Fixes attachments such adjustments without his guidance.
as saddle, bells, luggage carrier and lamp Undertakes new installation and carries
to assembled cycle and tests performance out alterations and modification under
on road. Cleans, oils and greases moving guidance of Signal Inspector. Submits
parts; patches punctured tubes and fortnightly reports, informs about
repairs tyres. May cut threads where programmes to Station Maters concerned,
necessary with taps and dies. and maintains necessary records such as
failure book, inspection book, muster roll
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: attendance register, material indented
Code 7233 and received etc. Prevents wastage and
Title Agricultural and Industrial guides and controls men placed under
Machinery Mechanics and him. May specialize in electrical or
Repairers mechanical and signal equipment.
7233.2700 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Fitter, Signal Code 7233
Title Agricultural and Industrial
Machinery Mechanics and
Fitter, Signal: Mechanical and Electrical
Repairers
Signal Maintainer (Railways) tests, over
hauls and installs all mechanical and
7233.2800
electrical signal equipment other than
interlocking and station master's slide Agriculture Engineering Technician
control frames and maintains them in
working order to prevent failure and Agriculture Engineering Technician
detention of rail traffic. Issues maintains, services, repairs or overhauls
disconnection notices, as prescribed for different farm equipment such as
repairs and adjustments. Attends to all Tractors, Power tillers, Sprayers, Drillers,
failures of signal mechanism, locates and etc. Receives instructions from Senior
rectifies defects expeditiously, removes Engineers. Studies standing duty chart,
jamming of locking device by oiling, taping sketches, blue prints, etc. and decides
or other external means without opening methods of work to be adopted. Draws
cover and takes appropriate measure to necessary stores, examines their
prevent recurrence. Tests facing point, suitability, issues them to respective
locks detectors, electrical points and workers. Instructs and guides his
signal mechanism regularly while on subordinates on machines and tools to be
maintenance rounds and ensures that used, accuracy required, process of work
cover, of locking boxes of station masters and other details to ensure correct repairs
slide control room are not removed or overhauling. Checks completed work,
VOLUME II B 137
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
makes necessary adjustments or NSQF Level 4
replacements. Guides farmers in proper
use and upkeep of farm equipment. Lends ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machines on hire to farmers. Sells spare Code 7233
parts of farm machinery and implements. Title Agricultural and Industrial
Prepares contour maps by taking levels Machinery Mechanics and
and plane table surveying. Examines land Repairers
and prepares estimates for reforming the
land to make it suitable for cultivation. 7233.9900
Prepares plans for field channels for
Machinery Mechanics and Fitters,
surface and sub-surface drainage.
Other
Provides bench terraces in hill areas and
guides installation of sprinkler irrigation
Machinery Mechanics and Fitters, other
equipment and accessories. May design
perform number of routine and low skilled
and fabricate agricultural machinery. May
tasks in overhauling and repairing engines,
also sell pesticides and fertilisers.
pumps machines, etc., (other than
Electrical and Precision Instruments) such
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
as dismantling defective parts, cleaning
Code 7233
components, adjusting parts and are
Title Agricultural and Industrial
designated as Refrigeration Mechanic
Machinery Mechanics and
Helper, Maintenance Mechanic Helper,
Repairers
etc. according to type of work done.
7233.2901
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Fitter: Hydraulic and Pneumatic
Code 7233
System
Title Agricultural and Industrial
Machinery Mechanics and
Fitter Hydraulic and Pneumatic System Repairers
does regular upkeep of
Hydraulic/Pneumatic equipment/system, Family 7234
checking of hydraulic medium (hydraulic
mineral oil), air under pressure and
Bicycle and Related Repairers
rectifying breakdowns including;
identifying problems, dismantling
Bicycle and related repairers fit, maintain,
equipment, cleaning parts, rectifying root
service and repair the mechanical and
causes, re-assembling equipment,
checking alignment, vibration etc. to related equipment of bicycles, rickshaws,
ensure fitness of equipment prior to hand baby carriages, wheelchairs and similar
over and informing supervisor, non-motorized transport equipment.
operations, stores, etc. as appropriate in
hydraulic and pneumatic system. Sub Division 73
Handicraft and Printing Workers
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0810
Handicraft and Printing Workers make
QP NOS Name Fitter: Hydraulic and
and repair precision instruments, musical
Pneumatic System
instruments, various articles such as
VOLUME II B 138
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
jewellery, precious metal ware, ceramics, weave and decorate various glass,
porcelain ware and glassware, as well as ceramics, textile, straw, stone, wood and
handicrafts made of wood or textile, leather articles.
leather or related materials, or they
perform printing or book-binding tasks. Occupations in this Group are classified
The work is carried out by hand and by into the following Families:
hand-powered and other tools which are
used to reduce the amount of physical
7311 Precision Instrument Makers and
effort and time required for specific tasks,
Repairers
as well as to improve the quality of the
7312 Musical Instrument Makers and
products. The tasks call for an
Tuners
understanding of the work organization,
7313 Jewellery and Precision Metal
the materials and tools used, and the
Workers
nature and purpose of the final product.
7314 Potters and Related Workers
Tasks performed by workers in this sub-
major group usually include: making and 7315 Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders
repairing nautical, meteorological, optical and Finishers
and other precision instruments and 7316 Signwriter, Decorative Painters,
equipment; making and repairing musical Engravers and Etchers
instruments; making jewellery and
7317 Handicraft Workers in Wood,
precious metal ware; making pottery,
Basketry and Related Materials
porcelain ware, ceramics and glassware;
7318 Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
painting and decorating various articles;
Leather and Related Materials
producing handicraft articles in wood or
7319 Handicrafts Workers, Not
textile, leather and related materials;
Elsewhere Classified
performing printing or book-binding tasks.
Family 7311
Supervision of other workers may be
included. Precision Instrument Makers and
Repairers
Occupations in this Sub Division are
classified into the following Groups:
Precision-instrument makers and
repairers make, calibrate, repair,
731 Handicraft Workers
maintain, adjust and install mechanical
732 Printing Trades Workers watches, clocks, nautical, meteorological,
optical, orthopaedic and other precision
Group 731 instruments and equipment and set them
for correct performance.
Handicraft Workers
7311.0100
Handicraft workers combine artistic and
Mechanic Precision Instrument,
manual skills to design, make, repair,
adjust, maintain and decorate precision General
instruments, musical instruments,
jewellery and other precious-metals, Mechanic, Precision Instrument General
pottery and porcelain ware. They apply tests, repairs, overhauls and assembles
traditional and/or recently developed various precision instruments and their
techniques to carve, mould, assemble, parts for efficient performance. Examines
VOLUME II B 139
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
instrument for defects. Dismantles NSQF Level 4
components and cleans them in
appropriate fluid such as petrol, kerosene ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
etc. to find out extent of damage or wear Code 7311
and tear to parts. Removes minor defects Title Precision Instrument Makers and
of parts by grinding, filing, drilling, etc. Repairers
and replaces worn out and damaged
parts. Adjusts position of various parts 7311.0200
using screwdriver, spanner etc. and
Watch Repairer
assembles instrument to form complete
unit. Makes simple electrical connections,
Watch Repairer cleans repairs and adjusts
solders contact points and performs other
clocks, watches and time pieces for
tasks as necessary. Tests performance
accurate time keeping. Examines watch
either by visual observation or by
pieces or clock mechanism using
conducting simple electrical and
magnifying eyepiece to locate defects.
mechanical tests and ensures that
Opens watch and disassembles
repaired or assembled instrument
components or parts of watch such as
conforms to prescribed efficiency. May
main spring, hair spring, balance staff etc.
make new components and assemble new
using special screw drivers, tweezers,
instruments. May specialize in any
pincers, and other watch makers tool.
particular type of instrument like
Cleans part with benzene or other
mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic,
cleaning solution using special brushes.
electrical, optical, orthopaedic etc.
Checks, jewels, spring, pinion joints pivots,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
balance staff etc. and determines their
Code 7311
serviceability. Repairs or replaces broken
Title Precision Instrument Makers and
or damaged parts and assembles watch
Repairers
step by step in proper sequence ensuring
desired performance of each component.
7311.0101 Lubricates pivots and operating
Technician Instrumentation components with thin special type of vile
and soaks extra oil using pith sticks. Winds
Technician Instrumentation dismantles watch, observers performance and sets it
removes and replaces a range of with chronometer or accurate watch to
instruments and faulty peripheral regulate timing. Makes necessary
components down to unit and component adjustments after set period and regulates
level, setting up test equipment, timing both in horizontal and vertical
troubleshooting components of positions to ensure accurate time keeping.
instruments, calibrating them and also Is designated as Watch Maker if able to
preparing service reports and accurately make balance staff pivots etc. operate
documenting parts replacement and watchmakers lathe and overhaul
repair. chronometers, self-winding, electric and
other types of special watches and clocks.
Qualification Pack Details: May operate cleaning machine to clean
delicate parts in petrol and special
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0802
solutions.
QP NOS Name Technician
Instrumentation
VOLUME II B 140
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: parts of electrical and optical instruments
Code 7311 by accurate milling, filing, grinding,
Title Precision Instrument Makers and lapping and other processes. Studies
Repairers drawings or samples and examines
precision instrument like balance, meters,
7311.0300 pressure gauges etc. for defects.
Dismantles instrument, cleans metal
Assembler (Clock and Watch)
components in petrol, kerosene oil or
otherwise and checks them to find out
Assembler (Clock and Watch) assembles
extent of damage and further
and installs chime-controlling mechanisms
serviceability. Makes new parts on lathe
in master clocks according to blueprints
milling or other machines, if necessary.
and sketches, using watchmaker's tools:
Sizes and fits metal parts by filing,
Bolts mounting casting which houses clock
scraping, grinding lapping etc. as
and chimes mechanisms to inner rear
necessary and ensures their desired
panel of master clock case. Installs toggle
accuracy by checking with precision
switch and cut-off secondaries, for
measuring instruments shadow graph and
opening and closing chime-mechanism
other highly perfect devices. Assembles
circuit, on panel, and makes wire
parts to form complete unit. Gets
connections. Disassembles, examines,
electrical components repaired by
repairs, or adjusts spring-wound clock,
Electrician. Fits electrical and optical parts
and reassembles clock adding strike-
to instrument and adjusts them as
control parts, such as hour-strike spring to
required. Texts repaired or assembled
hour mechanism, night-spot cut-out to
instrument for clarity or vision sensitivity,
hour hand sleeve-wheel, and minute-
correct meter and scale readings etc. as
mercury ring to minute mechanism. Bolts
required and ensures stipulated
assembled clock mechanism in position on
performance within prescribed limits.
mounting casting. Assembles parts, such
Makes necessary adjustments and seals
as dial, hour and minute hands, contact
meters to avoid manipulations. May
springs, motor drum and condenser, and
specialize in particular type of instruments
makes wire connections to complete
like balance, pressure gauges, meters,
master clock mechanism. Installs
theodolites, etc. May make new
completed assembly into master clock
instruments from blue prints.
case.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7311
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Precision Instrument Makers and
Code 7311
Repairers
Title Precision Instrument Makers and
Repairers
7311.0401
Iron and Steel Fitter
7311.0400
Instrumentation
Mechanic Precision Instrument,
Mechanical
Iron and Steel Fitter Instrumentation
installs, dismantles, removes, replaces a
Mechanic Precision Instrument,
range of components down to sub-
Mechanical makes, alters and adjusts
assembly level right from pick up/unit
mechanical instruments or mechanical
VOLUME II B 141
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
point of measurement and linking either prescribed standard. Keeps record of
directly to the instrument or the production, indicating quantum of
instrument panel. This also involves rejections or bad workmanship. May be
making suitable slots on panel and fixing designated according to nature of duties
instruments and its associated parts under performed such as CYLINDER EXAMINER;
the supervision of Technician TESTER, PIPES: etc.
Instrumentation.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Qualification Pack Details: Code 7311
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0903 Title Precision Instrument Makers and
QP NOS Name Iron & Steel Fitter Repairers
Instrumentation
NSQF Level 3 7311.0600
Mechanic, Atomizer and Fuel Pump
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
(Diesel)
Code 7311
Title Precision Instrument Makers and
Mechanic Atomiser and Fuel Pump
Repairers
(Diesel) repairs and sets atomisers and
fuel pumps units of diesel engines, using
7311.0500
testing and setting tool, for efficient
Viewer, Workshop performance. Dismantles fuel pump kit
using different tools. Cleans various
Viewer, Workshop; Examiner, Metal components in oil and examines them for
Working; Checker, Metal Working checks wear and tear, damage etc. Replaces
mechanical components, units, machines damaged or worn out parts with new
etc., at various stages of manufacture, ones. Assembles parts together to
assembly and erection and ensures that complete unit. Fits assembled or repaired
they are made to required specifications. kit on test bench with testing engine and
Studies diagram, sketch etc., of product to gives various connections like fuel supply,
be manufactured to determine its pressure gauge etc. Sets machine speed
specification and other details. Examines and pressure and starts testing pump.
product prior to and at various stages of Observes machine running at prescribed
manufacture to detect faculty material or speed and collects oil output in calibrated
bad workmanship. Measures and tests test tubes. Ensures that output of oil is as
components for accuracy using gauges per specifications and makes necessary
and other instruments and checks finished adjustment to plunger sleeve of pump to
products, assembled or erected structures get quantity of oil from each nozzle.
to ensure that they conform to drawings, Conducts face angle tests to pump oil at
samples or specifications. Marks defective correct timing and rectifies defects, if any.
units, components or parts for Removes atomiser from pump, fits it to
rectification or for rejection and approves special testing machine and operates
finished products that conform to machines to see whether oil is ejected in
required standard and specifications. fine spray under prescribed pressure.
Removes minor defects or informs Changes nozzles where necessary.
superiors if machines do not function Disassembles governor mechanism of fuel
properly or products do not come up to pump, cleans it, oils and greases moving
VOLUME II B 142
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
parts and sets it. May change governor REPAIRMAN if solely engaged in repairing
diaphragm if necessary. and assembling photography cameras and
allied gadgets and equipment.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7311 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Precision Instrument Makers and Code 7311
Repairers Title Precision Instrument Makers and
Repairers
7311.0800
Mechanic, Optical Instrument 7311.0900
Calibrator, Glass
Mechanic Optical Instruments repairs and
sets optical instruments such as Calibrator, Glass calibrates measuring and
microscopes, telescopes, binoculars detecting glass instrument such as
theodolites, photography cameras, pipette, burette, hydrometer,
sextants etc. for enlarged view thermometer etc. according to set
photography for recording accurate standards by direct experiments for
measurements, etc. by checking the recording correct readings. Sets and
centre, setting lenses to required focal connects master (standard) measuring
length and adjusting other components to instrument with water or appropriate
required perfection. Examines optical fluid supply line and connects instrument
instruments for defects visually or by to be calibrated with master using rubbers
focussing it to standard observations. or glass tabling with stop cocks. Allows
Examines parts or components for wear measured quantity of liquid to flow into
and tear, damages etc. and replaces master measuring instrument, sets level
unserviceable ones. Repairs parts, where at zero by adding or flowing out extra
possible, by filing, grinding, scrapping etc. liquid as necessary, transfers contents
and fits new or ground lenses, mirrors and completely into instrument to be
other accessories according to prescribed calibrated by operating stop cock and
focal lengths and specifications. Grinds marks position of zero level on it with
glazes and cements (joining of two lenses paint, ink or coloured pencil. Marks
with Canada balsam to form one unit) different levels similarly by adding
lenses used in optical instruments such as measured quantity of liquid first into
microscopes, telescopes, gun sight master and then transferring whole lot
photographic equipment, etc. to obtains into instrument to be calibrated. Heats or
correct lens assemblies Aligns parts to cools mercury, alcohol, sensitive metal foil
requirement and assembles components or other appropriate indicator filled in
to form complete unit. Makes necessary thermometers and thermal recording
settings and adjustments to instruments instruments carefully through measured
and tests to repaired unit for clarity and degree of temperature and suitably marks
efficiency by visual observations or by position of observations recorded on glass
using them over fields to ensure desired body of instrument. Calibrates
result and accuracy. May assemble and fit intermediate position by dividing machine
new equipment. May be designated as calculators or by actual experiments as
CAMERA REPAIRMAN OR PHOTOGRAPHIC necessary. Removes provisional calibrated
EQUIPMENT ASSEMBLER AND instrument and makes permanent
VOLUME II B 143
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
marking as recorded by process of etching settings and loss of calibration. Rejects
or on pantograph machine. May etch malfunctioning devices and routes devices
calibrated glass with hydrofluoric acid. to specified department for rework or
salvaging of parts. May disassemble
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: instrument or device to determine cause
Code 7311 of defective operation and notify
Title Precision Instrument Makers and supervisory personnel of findings.
Repairers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7311.1000 Code 7311
Calibrator (Instrument and Title Precision Instrument Makers and
Repairers
Apparatus)
7311.1001
Calibrator (Instrument and Apparatus)
Calibration Technician
tests and calibrates controlling, indicating,
and measuring instruments and devices,
such as monochromators, pressure Calibration Technician sets, adjusts,
regulators, tachometers, temperature validates or verifies mechanical,
controls, and thermometers, to ensure pneumatic, hydraulic, electrical,
specified operating performance, using electronic, measuring and control
hand tools, testing and calibrating instruments using reference standards in
instruments and equipment, and precision accordance with predetermined standard
measuring instruments: Reads quality procedures.
control manual and testing specifications
to obtain data to test or calibrate specific Qualification Pack Details:
devices. Selects and installs accessories, QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0801
such as adapters, indicating gauges, or QP NOS Name Calibration
holding devices on test or calibration Technician
fixture, and connects instrument or device NSQF Level 4
to fixture, according to specifications,
using hand tools. Sets controls to regulate ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
factors, such as current flow, timing cycle, Code 7311
pressure, temperature, or vacuum, Title Precision Instrument Makers and
according to specifications, and activates Repairers
test or calibration equipment. Observes
readings on meters and gauges, and other 7311.1002
displays and performance of the device or
Calibration Engineer
instrument to identify functional defects
and determine calibration requirements.
Calibration Engineer tests and
Adjusts calibration mechanisms to obtain
standardizes medical devices as per device
specified operational performance of the
manufacturer’s specification or customer
device or instrument, using hand tools
requirement. The individual at work
and precision measuring and calibrating
compares the measurements of medical
instruments and equipment. Applies
device with the master equipment and
sealing compound on calibration
then certifies medical device as
mechanism to prevent readjustment of
standardized or non-standardized as per
VOLUME II B 144
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
device manufacturer’s specification or Orthopaedic Appliance and Limbs
customer’s requirement. Technician; Orthopaedic Technician;
Artificial Limb maker, Surgical makes and
Qualification Pack Details: repairs artificial limbs, braces, and other
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q8002 orthopaedic appliance according to
QP NOS Name Calibration Engineer prescription. Makes cast of limb or
NSQF Level 4 deformity and draws patterns from
measurements of body members to be
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: fitted. Cuts and fashions devices from
material, such as metal, plastic and
Code 7311
leather, using welding equipment, forge,
Title Precision Instrument Makers and
riveting machine, drill and hand tools;
Repairers
shapes leather parts over lasts and rivets
parts to braces; pads braces with felt and
7311.1100
sponge rubber; polishes completed
Calibrator, Other
devices, using buffing wheel; adjusts nuts
and screws at joints to insure free
Calibrators, other calibrate metal wood
movement. Repairs worn-out or damaged
and synthetic material seals for linear and
appliance. May harness devices to limbs
angular measurements using pantograph,
or stumps, using knowledge of functional
dividing or other sensitive machine
anatomy. May instruct patient in use of
according to specifications. Set sized
device. May be designated according to
object accurately on machine using
type of appliance being made as
precision instruments and holding devices
ARTIFICIAL ARM MAKER, FOOT MAKER.
like dial indicator, combination set,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
clamps, mandrill, etc. Fit template or
Code 7311
necessary gadgets and cutter in machine.
Title Precision Instrument Makers and
Set machine in relation to object
Repairers
according to divisions required and mark
extreme positions. Operate machine as
7311.1400
per template or calculation and machine
Instrument Maker, Other
markings to divide object into specified
number of divisions by short and long cuts
as required. Check object with set Instrument Makers, other (Except
standard to ensure accuracy. May copy Electrical) include all other workers
from sample or standard scale. engaged in fitting, assembling, calibrating
and repairing mechanical, hydraulic,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: optical and other types of instruments
except electrical, not elsewhere classified.
Code 7311
Title Precision Instrument Makers and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Repairers
Code 7311
7311.1200 Title Precision Instrument Makers and
Repairers
Orthopaedic Appliances and Limb
Technician
7311.9900
VOLUME II B 145
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Precision Instrument Makers and designs on instrument. May repair
Repairers, Other instruments. May specialize in making a
particular type of instrument and be
designated according to type of
Precision Instrument Makers and
instrument made such as VIOLIN MAKER,
Repairers, other perform number of low
VEENA MAKER, SITAR MAKER, ESRAJ
skilled and routine tasks such as
MAKER.
dismantling instruments, filing, making
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
connections, operating vacuum machine,
soldering, sealing covers, cleaning lenses Code 7312
etc., and is designated as Instrument Title Musical Instrument Makers and
Mechanic Mate, Instrument Mechanic Tuners
Helper etc.
7312.0200
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Harmonium Maker
Code 7311
Title Precision Instrument Makers and Harmonium Maker makes harmonium by
Repairers preparing different parts of instrument
such as, cabinet reed board, keys, bellow
Family 7312 and stoppers and assembling them using
hand or power tools. Selects required type
Musical Instrument Makers and and size of wooden planks for making
different parts of harmonium. Marks them
Tuners
with dimensions using tool rule, square,
Musical-instrument makers and tuners
pencil, etc., and makes different parts by
make, assemble, repair, adjust, restore
sizing, sawing and planing using carpentry
musical instruments and tune them to the
tools. Assembles harmonium cabinet
required pitch with hand or power tools.
(wooden box) by nailing different parts
They usually specialize in one type of
together. Makes air compartment in
instrument, such as string instruments,
inside bottom of box air-tight by gluing
brass instruments, reed instruments or
soft leather or strips along edges.
percussion instruments.
Prepares bellow from card board by
cutting card board strips and gluing with
7312.0100
soft leather and coloured paper making
Musical Instrument Maker (String)
necessary folds. Attaches bellow to
harmonium cabinet by gluing and
Musical Instrument Maker (Stringed) clamping it with nails and springs. Fixes
makes stringed instruments such as Sitar, necessary wooden bridge over air
Tambura, Violin and Veena from wood, compartment in box. Prepares reed board
ebonite, metal or other materials, using by making required numbers of apertive
hand or power tools, selects and marks and fixing reeds one side and rest pins on
materials, saws out, drills, carves, shapes other sides. Makes necessary number of
and finishes parts of instrument, glues or holes for different notes on reed board,
screws parts together; applies stain and fixes knobs for control of air from air
several coats of varnish, attaches strings, compartment to apertives of reed board.
pegs and other fittings; tests instrument Ensures that joints are air-tight by
and makes changes, if necessary to bellowing and reeds give proper tuning.
improve tone. May carve ornamental
VOLUME II B 146
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Tests and adjusts harmonium to produce Harmonium Fitter makes inside of
required tune by filing, (opening and harmonium cabinet airtight by cutting and
closing reed tongues and comparing notes gluing soft leather strips along edges and
by striking tuning fork). May fix metal fixing necessary fittings. Examines
handles to cabinet, leather or plastic cloth harmonium cabinets prepared by
over reed frame and other decorative Carpenter are according to specification;
fittings. May polish box and give smooth cuts soft leather strips of required sizes
finish. May repair Harmonium by and glues them to edges of cabinet; fits
dismantling and replacing different parts wooden frame or bridges inside box for
of instrument. May specialize in preparing fixing reed frame, key board and other
particular parts of instrument. harmonium parts; glues and screws key
board and reed frame to cabinet. Fits keys
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and other attachments in to position;
Code 7312 tests instruments and makes necessary
Title Musical Instrument Makers and adjustments to prevent air leak. May
Tuners polish and apply varnish to cabinet. May
tune harmonium for correct note and
7312.0300 pitch. May repair harmonium.
Harmonium Key Maker
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7312
Harmonium Key Maker makes harmonium
Title Musical Instrument Makers and
keys of required sizes by sawing, drilling,
Tuners
filing and smoothening soft wood and
7312.0500
gluing celluloid strips on them. Selects soft
wood pieces of required quality; marks, Bellow Man (Harmonium)
saws out curves and shapes wood to make
harmonium keys according to Bellow Man (Harmonium) makes
specification; cuts celluloid strips of harmonium bellows by measuring, cutting
required size and glues it over wooden card board strips and pleating them with
keys; screws keys to key board and fixes soft leather and coloured paper. Selects
key board to wooden cabinet; drills holes card board of desired thickness; marks
on cabinet as per specification and and cuts groove or channel on card board
designs and fits stoppers to control wind at parallel lines to permit folding; folds
inside instrument; may fit reed frame to card board along slit edges. Pleats to form
cabinet. May make bellows and fit them bellows; covers bellows with satin and
to instruments. May tune up instrument. cloth; glues leather or rexine and places
metal guards on corners of bellows and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: screws, nuts or glues bellow to instrument
Code 7312 cabinet and operates leak; bellow to test
Title Musical Instrument Makers and air lead by playing notes; operates bellow
Tuners to check proper operation. May tune
harmonium reeds and glue reeds in reed
7312.0400 blocks. May fabricate metal parts using
shop machines and tools. May repair used
Harmonium Fitter
harmonium.
VOLUME II B 147
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7312 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Musical Instrument Makers and Code 7312
Tuners Title Musical
Instrument Makers and Tuners
7312.0600 7312.1000
Reed Fitter (Harmonium) Organ Tuner
Reed Fitter, Harmonium makes wooden Organ Tuner tests and adjusts organ pipes
reed board according to sample or to produce correct tones and keeps
specification and fits metal reeds and playing mechanisms in good condition.
strings on board with screws. Selects Strikes tuning fork and compares tone
wooden board; marks and chisels out with that of selected pipe. Adjusts
grooves or slots to fit reeds according to distance between lips of pipe until tone
sample or specifications; fits and screws coincides with that of tuning fork. Adjusts
reeds in slots on board and fixes other pipes, comparing their tones by ear
assembled reed frame to cabinet. with that of pipe already adjusted.
Operates harmonium to check reeds to Replaces defective wiring, switches,
give out correct tune when concerned key blowers and other parts.
is depressed. May tune harmonium. May
make wooden cabinet and fit key board to ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
box. May repair used harmonium and Code 7312
replace old reeds. Title Musical
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Instrument Makers and Tuners
Code 7312
Title Musical 7312.1200
Instrument Makers and Tuners Piano Tuner
7312.0800
Piano Tuner tests and adjusts pianos to
Finisher (Harmonium) produce correct tone. Strikes tuning fork
and compares tone with that of 'A' string
Finisher, Harmonium gives finishing of piano. Tightens or loosens strings by
touches to harmonium by making and turning string pin until tone coincides with
fitting stops for controlling air in that of tuning fork. Adjusts other strings
harmonium and by cutting and fitting comparing their tones by ear with that of
celluloid pieces for decorating cabinet. 'A' string already adjusted. May replace
Examines assembled harmonium for any broken strings and make repairs.
defect; polishes cabinet using colour stain
and varnish to give required finish; fixes ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
coloured celluloid strips on reed; fits Code 7312
wooden or plastic knobs to airholes and Title Musical
other attachments such as handles and Instrument Makers and Tuners
decorative fittings. May make, assemble
and fit various accessories to harmonium. 7312.1300
May tune harmonium. May repair used
Tabla Maker (Musical Instrument)
harmonium.
VOLUME II B 148
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
compound on middle of upper surface of
Tabla Maker (Musical Instrument) dome leather cover where necessary for correct
shaped wooden, metal or clay body open tune, tests and tunes instrument by
at one end. Collects cone or dome shaped striking cover surface with hand or stick
wooden, metal or clay of required size adjusting adjusters for required tone
open at one end and other instrument pitch. May specialize in making particular
parts such as soft leather of desired types of drum and be designated
thickness, leather straps, cords, brass accordingly such as BRASS DRUM MAKER;
rings as necessary for type of tabla to be SIDE DRUM MAKER; DHOLAK MAKER;
made; cuts and sizes leather to close MRIDUNG MAKER; TAVIL MAKER;
mouth of reed and punches holes round KANJIRA MAKER. May use parchment
edge of leather cover; places punched leather for special type of drums. May
cover over mouth of vessel and passes repair drums by dismantling and replacing
leather straps through holes; inserts leather skins, tension rods, rims and
guides through leather straps and fastens shells.
leather cover to body and secures it
tightly at bottom of vessel ties to a brass ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
or leather ring; applies special ink mixed Code 7312
with special wax on central portion of Title Musical
leather top for proper tuning; tests tone Instrument Makers and Tuners
of tabla by striking or drumming with
fingers; tunes tabla to required pitch by
7312.1500
tightening leather straps and changing
Clarinet Assembler
position of guides. May repair and tune
used tablas.
Clarinet Assembler makes clarinet by
assembling mouth piece, shank, upper
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and lower pieces, bell and keys and tunes
Code 7312
it to required pitch for correct tone.
Title Musical
Collects parts such as springs, pins, keys,
Instrument Makers and Tuners
reed for making clarinet of desired type.
Joins upper and lower part of body
7312.1400
together; fits keys and other attachments
Drum Maker, Musical
in position; fixes reed to mouth piece
through reed holder; tests instrument and
Drum Maker, Musical makes musical makes changes, if necessary, to improve
drums by mounting animal skins on tone and tunes it to desired pitch with or
wooden or metal case open on one or without tuning fork. May repair used
both ends with metal rims and fitting instrument. May be designated as FLUTE
adjusters to tune drum to required pitch. MAKER if engaged in making and tuning
Collects wooden or metal case of desired flutes.
size and specification; secures tightly
leather or hide cover over metal or ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
leather ring and fastens ring to mouth of
Code 7312
shell with leather cord after fitting
Title Musical
adjusters to it; adjusts tension of leather
Instrument Makers and Tuners
cover by moving adjusters. Applies special
VOLUME II B 149
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7312.1600
Bag Pipe Maker ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7312
Title Musical
Bag Pipe Maker makes bag pipes by
Instrument Makers and Tuners
assembling finished wooden organ pipes
in specially designed leather bags. Collects
wooden pipes and leather bag according
7312.1800
to specification; prepares bag pipe reeds
by shaving and filing cane of specified Musical Instrument Repairer
variety; fixes reeds in mouth piece
through reed holders; tunes organ pipes Musical Instruments Repairer repairs all
for tone of desired pitch; cuts holes in kinds of musical instruments such as
leather bag and fits in finished wooden Violin, Veena, Tambura, Sitar,
pipes in holes in proper position; secures Harmonium, Guitar, Mandolin, Piano, and
pipes to bag tightly with cord to prevent tunes them. Tests particular instrument to
leakage of air from bag; fastens brass and find nature of defect, dismantles
tenor pipes with cords and tunes pipes to instrument and examines parts for defects
ensure correct pitch and tone. May or damage. Repairs or replaces worn or
specialize in one or more operations, such damaged parts using hand tools, refits
as marking act in parts or organ pipes and parts together to construct instrument;
be designated accordingly. Sets repaired instrument for correct
performance, tunes instruments by
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: playing it and adjusting keys, strings, etc.
Code 7312 May polish with colour stain or varnish to
Title Musical give good finish. May make new parts to
Instrument Makers and Tuners replace damaged ones using hand tools.
May be designated according to type of
7312.1700 instrument repaired, such as VIOLIN
REPAIRER, VEENA REPAIRER,
Brass Musical Instruments
HARMONIUM REPAIRER, PIANO
Assembler
REPAIRER, etc.
Brass Musical Instrument Assembler
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
makes required types of brass musical
Code 7312
instruments by fitting piston valves, valve
Title Musical
tops, bell etc.; in metal body. Collects
Instrument Makers and Tuners
different parts of musical instrument to be
made; joins parts by screwing, riveting or
soldering as necessary to obtain desired
7312.9900
shape; fits piston valves, valve tops,
Musical Instrument Makers and
springs, washers, etc. Checks leakage,
brazing etc. and tunes it to required pitch Tuners, Other
by fitting slide or further tooling as
necessary. May specialize in any particular Musical Instrument Makers and Tuners,
type of brass musical instruments such as Other include all other musical instrument
cornet, baritone, euphonium, bugle, makers engaged in making or assembling
trumpet etc. other types of musical instruments not
VOLUME II B 150
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
elsewhere classified as: Organ Pipe Maker ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
casts sheets of organ metal; makes pipes Code 7313
therefrom and from zinc-makes air Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
conduits of galvanised iron. Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 7313.0101
Code 7312 Jewellery Polisher
Title Musical Instrument Makers and
Tuners
Jewellery Polisher provides shine and
lustre to the cast jewellery at different
Family 7313
stages of its manufacturing such as pre-
Jewellery and Precision Metal setting and final polish. The individual
Workers works with different types of tools,
polishing compounds, soft and hard buffs
fixed on high-speed rotating motor bench.
Jewellery and precious metal workers
design, fabricate, adjust, repair, or
Qualification Pack Details:
appraise jewellery, ceremonial or religious
items, gold, silver, other precious metals, QP NOS Reference G&J/Q3010
or gems. They cut, file, polish and set QP NOS Name Jewellery Polisher
precious and semi-precious stones NSQF Level 3
including gems and diamonds and engrave
designs on jewellery and precious metal ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
articles. They cut and polish diamonds for Code 7313
industrial purposes. Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Workers
7313.0100
Roller, Gold and Silver 7313.0102
Plater
Roller, Gold and Silver makes silver and
gold sheets of varied thickness by process Plater applies a layer of Rhodium, on the
of rolling. Adjusts roll gap of rolling surface of the jewellery piece. The
machine by means of handle operating individual operates the plating plant or
gearing system machine. Takes required runs the manual process for applying
weight and size of metal piece (caste and Rhodium on the finished
annealed if necessary) and carefully jewellery piece for giving bright white and
inserts it in between roller, keeping it reflective appearance to the precious
pressed against bottom roller. Checks metal jewellery.
thickness of sheet after each rolling,
reduces roll gap and repeats process until Qualification Pack Details:
required thickness is obtained. Ensures QP NOS Reference G&J/Q3212
that texture of sheet or foil does not get QP NOS Name Plater
spoilt during rolling. May prepare sheets NSQF Level 4
or foils manually by process of hammering
and flattening. May anneal sheet or foil ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
after rolling.
Code 7313
VOLUME II B 151
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal and wind it on manually or mechanically
Workers operated drum. May also make wire
manually by beating rod in sized pattern
7313.0103 or mould.
Filer and Assembler
Qualification Pack Details:
Filer and Assembler works with numerous QP NOS Reference G&J/Q0606
hand and machine tools to remove sprues QP NOS Name Component Maker
from the cast jewellery piece; rectify NSQF Level 3
casting defects such as porosity, blisters,
bubbles, and cracks; and assemble the ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
final jewellery components meant for Code 7313
linking. Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Workers
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q2909 7313.0202
QP NOS Name Filer and Assembler Gem Stone Thread Maker
NSQF Level 3
Gem Stone Thread Maker uses hands and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: fine needles to thread several beads or
Code 7313 cabochon or faceted stones into a
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal jewellery piece, as per design.
Workers
7313.0201 Qualification Pack Details:
Wire Maker, Gold and QP NOS Reference G&J/Q6909
Silver/Component Maker QP NOS Name Gem Stone Thread
Maker
NSQF Level 2
Wire Maker, Gold and Silver makes silver
and gold wires of specified thickness by
heating and drawing metal in specially
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
designed machine. Takes gold or silver rod
of required size and weight and heats it up Code 7313
(dull red) in mild fire. Beats one end of rod Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
to narrow point and passes it through one Workers
of larger holes of sizing plate or die. Places
plate with rod securely in gap of drawing 7313.0301
machine. Holds protruding end of rod Gold Curer, General/Gold Refiner
with tongs and anchors it suitably in roller
chain. Sets speed, starts machine and Gold Curer, General; Gold Refiner,
removes anchor from chain as soon as rod General extracts pure gold from impure
has been pulled through and formed into state by chemical process. Adds double
wire. Repeats process by passing wire quantity of silver to gold (in impure state)
successively through smaller holes until and melts them in charcoal or coke fired
required size is obtained. May draw wire pit furnace. Quenches molten metal in
of desired thickness through series of dies water to form solid mass. Adds nitric acid
(steel or diamond) of diminishing holes and reheats in charcoal fired furnace to
VOLUME II B 152
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
dissolve impurities and silver. Removes Code 7313
gold separated from impurities by Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
filtration and washes it numbers of times Workers
in water. Re-melts washed gold to form
bar of pure gold. Extracts silver in same 7313.0500
manner by adding requisite quantity of Gold Foil Maker
copper to solution.
Gold Foil Maker makes gold foils from
Qualification Pack Details:
wires for setting jewels in ornaments.
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q3414 Moulds gold into small bar and gets it
QP NOS Name Gold Refiner drawn into wire of required gauge. Cuts
NSQF Level 6 convenient length of wire, heats it to
specified temperature in mild fire and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: flattens it to extent possible by beating it
Code 7313 with hammer on anvil. Reheats it in
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal controlled low fire, cools and cleans it in
Workers chemical or solution of lemon juice and
water and repeats process of beating on
7313.0401 anvil until it turns into thin paper like foil.
Gold Curer, Mint/Gold Melter and Ensures at every stage that foil is not
cracked or broken. May also prepare silver
Refiner
foils from wire, and is designated as
SILVER FOIL MAKER.
Gold Curer, Mint; Gold Refiner, Mint
refines impure gold by chemical process.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Melts unrefined gold in furnace and
Code 7313
injects chlorine into it. Removes Chlorides
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
(chemical compounds of impurities with
Workers
chlorine) thus formed by scoop and tongs
and pours out purified gold. Re melts
7313.0600
purified gold for testing fineness and
sampling. Repeats process if necessary. Leaf Maker, Gold and Silver
May melt acid treated roasted
precipitates of impure gold with oxidising Leaf Maker, Gold and Silver beats small
agents and sand in steel trays on furnace, strips of gold and silver into thin leaves for
pour out molten gold into buttons and bar medicinal purposes, dressing sweet
moulds and raise fineness of base bullion dishes, etc. Cuts small strips of desired
by refixing it using fair clay pipes and metal into suitable size and places them
compressed air. individually in between sheets of special
type of skin bound together. Covers
Qualification Pack Details: sheets of skin holding metal inside thicker
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q0404 skin covering and beats them on anvil
QP NOS Name Gold Melter and with wooden mallet. Checks extent of
Refiner spreading frequently while beating and
NSQF Level 7 ensures that metal pieces do not get stuck
to skin sheets. Removes metal leaves then
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: formed and places them individually on
VOLUME II B 153
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
fine paper sheets. May use special type of Polisher and Cleaner
paper instead of skin for beating. May
light small coal fire to remove moisture Polisher and Cleaner finishes the jewellery
from skin and avoid sticking of metal frame and cleans it thoroughly in order to
leaves on skin sheets. give the base frame the look that the
design requires. Polishing is done at
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: multiple stages of jewellery making with
Code 7313 different types of materials or abrasives.
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal Cleaning is also done at multiple stages of
Workers jewellery making using different types of
techniques as applicable.
7313.0700
Goldsmith Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q0707
Goldsmith; Sonar prepares gold QP NOS Name Polisher and
ornaments of required design and weight Cleaner
by heating, moulding, bending, drawing NSQF Level 3
etc. Studies design or sample and takes
required weight of gold by weighing in ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sensitive balance. Moulds piece of gold Code 7313
into small bars by heating on mild fire or Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
takes required weight of sheet or wire Workers
according to design. Makes designed
ornaments by stages using dies and hand 7313.0702
tools, such as tongs, hammer, hand saw
Goldsmith Enameller
drill, file etc., and by heating metal
according to necessity by means of oil
Goldsmith: Enameller works on handmade
lamp and blow pipe to facilitate working.
gold jewellery manufacturing prepares
Makes jewel setting arrangements (if so
enamel colours of different types to paint
designed) in ornament uses lac as filling
vibrant patterns on the finished jewellery
where necessary. Polishes ornament by
frame as per design. The individual at
cloth, special yarns, or buff. May make
work in handmade gold jewellery
individual parts of ornament and finally
manufacturing prepares enamel colours of
join them together either by fusing them
different types to paint vibrant patterns
by heat or fixing them by wire. May also
on the finished jewellery frame as per
do jewel setting, enamelling (mina work)
design.
etc. May be designated as SILVERSMITH if
employed in making silver wares and
Qualification Pack Details:
ornaments.
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q0909
QP NOS Name Goldsmith:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Enameller
Code 7313
NSQF Level 4
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7313
7313.0701
VOLUME II B 154
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal Qualification Pack Details:
Workers QP NOS Reference G&J/Q0808
QP NOS Name Setter
7313.0703 NSQF Level 3
Goldsmith Frame Maker
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Goldsmith Frame Maker, works with Code 7313
machine and hand tools to create the Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
base jewellery frame from gold as per Workers
design and for further embellishing with
components, gemstones and enamelling 7313.0802
and plating. The goldsmith is responsible Metal Setter
for delivering quality gold
jewellery with minimum gold or stone
Metal setter works with numerous hand
loss.
and machine tools to set diamond and
gemstones as per design, and is
Qualification Pack Details:
responsible for delivering: levelled,
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q0606 damage-free and secured setting of
QP NOS Name Goldsmith Frame stones while maintaining its brilliance.
Maker Qualification Pack Details:
NSQF Level 3
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q3111
QP NOS Name Metal Setter (Basic)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
NSQF Level 3
Code 7313
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Workers
Code 7313
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
7313.0801
Workers
Jewel Setter/Setter
7313.0803
Jewel Setter; Gem Setter sets jewels in Wax Setter
ornaments according to design. Fixes
jewels on wooden board or box by shellac
Wax setter (basic) works with numerous
according to design. Examines ornaments
hand tools to set diamond and gemstones
for jewel setting and makes necessary
as per design. The individual is responsible
alternations if required. Lays ornament on
for delivering: levelled, damage-free and
table, heats shellac slightly on oil lamp,
secured setting of stones while
picks up jewels one at a time, sets them
maintaining its brilliance.
individually in pockets of ornament
designed for fixing jewels and securely
locks each one of them by bending metal
Qualification Pack Details:
points over jewel or by overlapping
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q2707
system. Is designated as KUNDAN
QP NOS Name Wax Setter
WORKER if engaged in setting jewels by
NSQF Level 3
pressing pieces of thin gold foils with
tweezer and needle.
VOLUME II B 155
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7313 Code 7313
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Workers Workers
7313.0804 7313.0902
Wax Tree Maker Rough Assorter
Wax tree maker works with different Rough Assorter needs to divide rough
types of waxes, wax soldering machine diamonds into groups having similar
and consumables in order to assemble characteristics, by looking at the rough
wax pieces in a tree like structure. through an eye glass under light, using
his/her knowledge and experience. Each
Qualification Pack Details: rough diamond is assessed according to its
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q2606 natural characteristics – judging
QP NOS Name Wax Tree Maker specifically its colour, clarity, carat and
NSQF Level 5 model or shape.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Qualification Pack Details:
Code 7313 QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4101
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal QP NOS Name Rough Assorter
Workers NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7313.0901 Code 7313
Gem Sorter Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Workers
Gem Sorter; Jewel Sorter examines,
7313.0903
selects and removes gems from rough
stones by pincer. Lays pieces of rough Rough Marker
stones on table. Cuts them in smaller
pieces if necessary, examines them Rough marker needs to mark assorted
individually with magnifying glass and rough diamonds manually, using a marker
locates portion to be retained. Checks pen for various requirements like
frequently portion to be cut and clips off identification, windowing, cleaving, laser
surplus portion bit by bit by pincer or or blade sawing, bruiting, etc. A marker
marks stones with Indian ink. Fixes them needs to use his/her experience and make
in sockets in brass rod, using adhesive precise marking as the accuracy of the
solution (sicotine, plaster of Paris etc.) for following process depends on the
sawing. Eliminates white veins from corals accuracy of the marking. The marking
and sorts pearls by shape and size. must be made with the objective of
maximizing the value, or any other as
Qualification Pack Details: fixed by the company.
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q0809
QP NOS Name Sorter Qualification Pack Details:
NSQF Level 3 QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4101
QP NOS Name Rough Marker
VOLUME II B 156
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
NSQF Level 4 another diamond tool. Places cleaving
knife on groove and carefully strikes with
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: small hammer to split stone into two parts
Code 7313 of required specifications. May repeat
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal process if further splitting is required.
Workers
Qualification Pack Details:
7313.1001 QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4404
Gem Slicer/Gemstone Rough Cutter QP NOS Name Gem Cleaver
NSQF Level 5
Gem Slicer cuts jewels for sizing by using
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
thin rotating cutter. Applies cutting
solution (solution of Multan clay, Code 7313
corundum and diamond powder) on Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
cutter. Directs Lapidary Helper to rotate Workers
driving wheel at steady speed. Holds
stone or jewel carefully with fingers,
presses it against cutter, applies cutting
solution frequently and cuts jewels as 7313.1201
required. Checks stone or jewel frequently Inclusion Plotter
while cutting to ensure proper sizing. May
slice jewels by machine having number of Inclusion plotter uses different
cutting blades. May also extract jewels technologies such as M-Box, Immersion
from rough stone by slicing. Is also known Glass (IG) and Galaxy, based on
as DIAMOND SAWYER if employed in Helium/Sarin software, to view and
sawing diamonds. manually or automatically plot different
types of inclusions such cloud, surface
Qualification Pack Details: cavities, blind spots, pin point inclusion,
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q6505 3D, flat cracks, curved cracks. Inclusion
QP NOS Name Gemstone Rough plotting helps the planner determine what
Cutter can be achieved in the cut stone, which
NSQF Level 3 will determine its ultimate value. Hence,
precision is important in this job.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7313 Qualification Pack Details:
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4202
Workers QP NOS Name Inclusion Plotter
NSQF Level 4
7313.1101
Gem Cleaver ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7313
Gem Cleaver cuts or cleaves precious Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
stones, previously marked, using knife and Workers
hammer. Sets marked stone in dop with
shellac and fixes dop on cleaving table. 7313.1202
Makes groove along marked line with Planner
VOLUME II B 157
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Planner uses the designing software and a second diamond spinning in opposite
planning and marking machines to decide direction to slowly round it into a cone
where to mark the diamond rough for shape. A bruter must be careful: so that
generating the most profitable polished excess bruting does not cause too much
diamond for stone loss or sub-optimal
the company as per its policy of bruting causes the girdle to disappear at a
maximizing value or colour and weight later stage of processing.
retention.
Qualification Pack Details:
Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4505
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4202 QP NOS Name Manual Bruter
QP NOS Name Planner NSQF Level 3
NSQF Level 4 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7313
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Code 7313 Workers
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Workers 7313.1302
7313.1300 Auto Blocker
Gem Grinder, Hand
Auto Blockers work with the auto-blocking
Gem Grinder, Hand; Jewel Grinder Hand; machine and make the basic four (or
Lapidary, Hand grinds jewels to designed eight) bottom and top facets of a diamond
shape and size by hand operated grinding in order to make it ready for final
wheel. Embeds jewels on bamboo stick polishing or brilliance. For auto blocking,
with shellac. Rotates grinding wheel the stone is set in a dop is fixed in the
backwards and forwards by operating bow auto-blocking machine and held
with right hand. Applies water on wheel down on a revolving cast-iron scaife
and grinds stone by pressing it against charged with diamond dust.
side of corundum grinding wheel. Checks
stone frequently by sight and continues Qualification Pack Details:
grinding until required shape and size is QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4606
obtained. May hold bigger sized stones QP NOS Name Auto Blocker
directly by left hand, grind it to shape and NSQF Level 3
size by manipulation of fingers.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7313
Code 7313 Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal Workers
Workers
7313.1303
7313.1301
Gemstone Facet Maker
Manual Bruter
Gemstone Facet Maker works with high-
Manual bruter works on the doped speed and angle indexed rotating scaife
diamond to be girdled and holds it against machines with diamond or steel laps in
VOLUME II B 158
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
order to grind facets on, mainly, set either in a lead dop or a mechanical-
transparent gemstones. clamp.
Qualification Pack Details: Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q6707 QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4606
QP NOS Name Gemstone Facet QP NOS Name Manual Blocker
Maker NSQF Level 3
NSQF Level 3
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 7313
Code 7313 Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Title Jewellery and Precision Workers
Metal Workers
7313.1306
7313.1304 Auto Bruter
Table Cutter
Table cutter works with table dop tang Auto Bruter works with bruting machine
system and make the first, biggest and the and another diamond or wheel (rotating
most important facet of a diamond by in opposite direction to the diamond
polishing it on the polishing wheel or being bruted) to give the rough diamond
scaife in order to yield maximum brilliance round and cone shapes. A bruter must be
and symmetry. It is very important to careful: so that excess bruting does not
polish the table accurately as it is only cause too much stone loss or sub-optimal
through this facet that the light of the bruting causes the girdle to disappear at a
diamond can be seen. later stage of processing.
Qualification Pack Details: Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4606 QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4505
QP NOS Name Table Cutter QP NOS Name Auto Bruter
NSQF Level 3 NSQF Level 3
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7313 Code 7313
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Workers Workers
7313.1305 7313.1400
Manual Blocker Gem Polisher, Hand
Manual Blocker creates the basic four or Gem Polisher, Hand polishes gems
eight bottom and top facets on the bruted according to specification by special
diamond using the dop-tang system on manually or mechanically operated
the polishing diamond-dust charged scaife polishing wheels. Holds jewels by shellac
in such a way as to yield maximum on small bamboo stock, Fits required type
brilliance and symmetry. The diamond is of polishing sheel (lead for soft stone such
as emerald, spinel, yellow topaz, etc.;
VOLUME II B 159
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
copper for hard stones such as ruby, to segregate polished diamonds mainly
sapphire etc., and steel plates for less than 30 cents in size into two or three
diamonds) and starts wheel. Applies water groups based on some common
to wheel and presses stone against its characteristic cut, carat, clarity or colour.
surface. Checks stone frequently while The individual is responsible for delivering
polishing for finish. Polishes stone finally segregated diamonds with no loss.
in corundum polishing wheel in similar
manner. May polish bigger stones by Qualification Pack Details:
holding them directly by fingers and QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4909
manipulating against revolving wheel. QP NOS Name Polished Grader and
Assorter (Basic)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: NSQF Level 5
Code 7313
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Workers Code 7313
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
7313.1501 Workers
Diamond Assorter
7313.1503
Diamond Assorters have to separate Polished Diamond Grader and
polished diamonds and group them into Assorter (Advance)
lots having similar characteristics and
reject which are not as per required
Polished Graders and Assorters
quality. It is done by looking at the
(Advanced) mainly work with a loupe to
diamond through an eye glass under light
segregate polished diamonds into
and requires experience in spotting similar
multiple groups based on its
type of diamonds. Each diamond is
characteristics like cut, carat, clarity or
assessed according to its characteristics of
colour. The individual is required to have
cut, carat, colour and clarity.
knowledge of performing measurements
of 4Cs on a diamond. The individual is
Qualification Pack Details:
responsible for delivering segregated
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q2505 diamonds with no loss.
QP NOS Name Diamond Assorter
NSQF Level 4 Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4909
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Name Polished Diamond
Code 7313 Grader & Assorter
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal (Advance)
Workers NSQF Level 5
7313.1502 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Polished Diamond Grader and Code 7313
Assorter (Basic) Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Workers
Polished Grader and Assorter (Basic)
mainly works with a tripod or table loupe
VOLUME II B 160
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7313.1504 Gemstone Polisher works with high-speed
Bottom Polisher rotating machines with metal plates and
buffs to produce a fully finished stone.
The polisher may work on pre-shaped
Bottom polisher works with bottom dop
(cabochon) stone or faceted stone.
tang system and makes the 24 bottom
facets of a diamond by polishing it on the
Qualification Pack Details:
polishing wheel or scaife in order to yield
maximum brilliance and symmetry. For QP NOS Reference G&J/Q6707
polishing, the stone is set either in a lead QP NOS Name Gemstone Polisher
dop or a mechanical-clamp and held down NSQF Level 3
on a revolving cast-iron scaife (horizontal
and circular disc) charged with diamond ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
dust. Code 7313
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Qualification Pack Details: Workers
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4707
QP NOS Name Bottom Polisher 7313.1601
NSQF Level 3 Gemstone Pre-shaper
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Gemstone Pre-shaper works with high-
Code 7313 speed rotating scaife machines with
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal diamond or steel laps in order to give the
Workers rough cut gemstone the shape as per
plan. Pre-shaping determines the shape,
7313.1505 size and weight of the processed final
Gemstone Girdle Polisher stone.
Qualification Pack Details:
Gemstone girdle polisher works with high-
speed rotating machines with metal QP NOS Reference G&J/Q6606
scaifes and buffs to produce a fully QP NOS Name Gemstone Pre-
finished stone. shaper
NSQF Level 4
Qualification Pack Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q6707
QP NOS Name Gemstone Girdle Code 7313
Polisher Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
NSQF Level 3 Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 7313.1602
Code 7313 Gemstone Final Shaper and
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal Calibrator
Workers
7313.1506 The individual works with high-speed
Gemstone Polisher rotating scaife machines with diamond or
steel laps in order to give the pre-shaped
VOLUME II B 161
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
gemstone the final shape as per planned Window opener works with dop-tang
weight and size. Final-shaping determines system to make an opening or a window
the shape, size and weight of the final on the rough diamond by polishing it on
stone. the polishing wheel or scaife in order to
observe and map internal features of the
Qualification Pack Details: diamond prior to cutting and planning,
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q6606 while maintaining minimal weight loss.
QP NOS Name Gemstone Final
Shaper and Qualification Pack Details:
Calibrator QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4101
NSQF Level 4 QP NOS Name Window Opener
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7313 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal Code 7313
Workers Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
7313.1701 Workers
Gem Driller
7313.1800
Gem Driller drills holes in precious stones Jewellery Engraver
according to design with bow drill. Fixes
diamond bit to serve as cutter in drill Jewellery Engraver engraves ornamental
(wooden piece having metal device to designs or letters on ornaments and
hold diamond bit) and sets sized wooden jewellery using fine chisels and hand tools.
plate having carved pocket on drilling Draws in pencil required design to be
table. Holds stone to be drilled in pocket engraved, on paper, if ornament is fairly
of wooden plate. Arranges continuous big or else draws design on ornament
flow of water as coolant at drilling point. itself using fine steel point. Transfers
Holds drill in bow and drills stone design from paper to ornament by placing
according to stone design, frequently designed paper on surface of metal
checking it for alignment and shape. Drills coated with wax solution and rubbing
pearl by using sharp steel pin instead of surface of paper to leave impression of
diamond bit. design on waxed surface. Holds ornament
in special device or fixes it in shellac.
Qualification Pack Details: Marks outlines of design on ornament
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q6808 using steel point. Engraves design by
QP NOS Name Gem Driller stages using different types and sizes of
NSQF Level 2 chisels and hand tools changing position
of article on table as required. Scoops out
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: excess material from metal using special
Code 7313 tools, cuts it to required depth or height
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal and prepares base for setting and
Workers mounting stone. May make simple designs
on plate for goldsmith to work. May
7313.1702 engrave or emboss by dies and polish
ornaments to high finish. May use
Window Opener
VOLUME II B 162
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
compass for marking circular designs. May freehand sketch on it. Forms outline of
set and mount stones on gold article. design with punch and hammer. Regulates
striking according to level of embossing
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: required. Completes design using various
Code 7313 types and sizes of punches and chisels and
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal by manipulation of finger movements.
Workers Removes embossed sheet from base by
warming it again on fire. May also emboss
7313.1900 sheets by dies.
Engraver
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7313
Engraver cuts floral, artistic designs or
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
letters on metal plates and other articles
Workers
such as flower vases, cigarette cases etc.,
using small chisels and hammer. Applies
7313.2300
chalk or wax solution on surface to be
engraved and makes free hand sketch or Inlayer, Metal
traces design on metal surface. Holds
article in special wooden device or fixes it Inlayer, Metal sets gold or silver wire on
in shellac in cases of round articles, such metal plates according to design using
as plates, ash trays etc., and places it at hand tools and produces colour effect by
convenient height. Marks outline of heat treatment. Secures sized plate on
design with small chisel. Engraves design base using lac. Applies chalk solution on
by stages with different chisels by careful plate and copies design or draws
manipulation of hands and fingers to freehand-sketch on it. Cuts design on it
required depth and finish. May use with fine chisels in stages and inserts
compass for marking circular designs. May pieces of gold or silver wire of required
also engrave without marking or any thickness in them with long needle like
prepared design. tool. Files surface to make it even,
polishes in buffing lathe and heats plate
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: on over till it changes colour to required
Code 7313 shade. Polishes plate by rubbing with
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal special type of stone. May also set very
Workers thin gold and silver wire on steel plate
(soft work) by first making surface rough
7313.2200 by fine knife cuts and then pressing wire
on it according to design, by fingers and
Embosser, Sheet
knife.
Embosser, Sheet embosses landscape,
floral, artistic design etc. on soft metal
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sheets by means of hand tools. Melts
Code 7313
powdered gum, mixes it with linseed oil
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
and applies paste thickly on metal plate to
Workers
serve as pad. Warms sheet to be
embossed on red hot charcoal or coke fire
7313.2401
and fixes it on pad. Applies chalk solution
on sheet and traces design or draws Rubber Mould Maker
VOLUME II B 163
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
diamond dust, dirt or other contaminants
Rubber mould maker uses different types collected during the cutting or
of rubber and works with vulcanising polishing process. This process may also
machine and various hand tools such as remove/bleach some of the darker
sterilised blade in order to create the surface reaching inclusions (Naats). Boiling
mould. this is sometimes performed on rough as
well to improve the appearance of the
Qualification Pack Details: rough.
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q2606
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Name Rubber Mould
Maker QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4808
NSQF Level 5 QP NOS Name Boiling In Charge
NSQF Level 2
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7313
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal Code 7313
Workers Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Workers
7313.2402
7313.2601
Wax Piece Maker
Final Quality Inspector
Wax piece maker works with different
types of waxes, injection moulding Final Quality Inspector ensures that the
machine and consumables in order to jewellery piece manufactured is as per
produce the wax replica of jewellery design and defect-free before allowing it
piece. to be dispatched to the customer.
Qualification Pack Details: Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q2606 QP NOS Reference G&J/Q1010
QP NOS Name Wax Piece Maker QP NOS Name Final Quality
NSQF Level 5 Inspector
NSQF Level 5
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7313
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal Code 7313
Workers Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Workers
7313.2501
7313.9900
Boiling In Charge
Jewellery, Goldsmith and
Boiling In Charge places the finished Silversmith Workers, Other
diamond in a beaker with chemical
solution like hydrochloric and sulphuric Jewellery, Goldsmith and Silversmith
acid and places the beaker in a heating Workers, other include all jewellery and
oven. This removes any residue of
VOLUME II B 164
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
precious metal workers not elsewhere Paris from the master mould using steel
classified. scraper; opens master mould and
removes mould into hot chamber for
Qualification Pack Details: drying. May form porcelain wares using
QP NOS Reference plaster-of-Paris moulds. May work from
QP NOS Name drawings without model.
NSQF Level
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 7134
Code 7313 Title Potters and Related Workers
Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Workers 7314.0200
Caster, Pottery and Porcelain
Caster, Pottery and Porcelain casts clay
and porcelain wares like cups, bowls, pots,
etc. by pouring slip (semi-liquid clay) into
Family 7314 plaster-of-Paris moulds. Selects moulds
and cleans inside to remove dust and
Potters and Related Workers foreign matter; holds parts of mould
together and ties around outer face with
Potters and related workers prepare cord to prevent leakage of slip through
pottery, porcelain ware, sanitary ware, joints; stirs slip thoroughly in container,
bricks, tiles and abrasive wheels by hand adding water if necessary to obtain proper
or by machine. consistency; fills pitcher with slip and
pours it into mould; pours excess slip from
mould after shell of clay of required
7314.0100
thickness has formed inside mould; places
Mould Maker, Pottery and
mould upside down to drip and dry; unties
Porcelain
cord holding mould parts together, and
removes partially dry moulded ware;
Mould Maker, Pottery and Porcelain scrapes ware with knife like tool;
makes moulds of plaster-of-Paris from smoothens it with wet sponge and places
models for production of pottery and it on drying rack. May fix attachments to
porcelain ware. Collects requisite quantity ware where required.
of plaster-of-Paris and dissolves it in fixed
amount of water to make semi-liquid ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
substance; stirs liquid thoroughly with
Code 7134
hand or stirring rod to acquire desired
Title Potters and Related Workers
consistency; applies soap solution inside
master mould to prevent plaster-of-Paris
7314.0300
sticking inside mould; pours liquid plaster-
Clay Toy Maker/Hand moulder
of-Paris into master mould stirs plaster-of-
Paris by hand inside master mould to
Clay Toy Maker makes toys from clay.
remove air bubbles; allows plaster-of-
Mixes mud or special type clay with water
Paris to settle and dry inside master
to make wet or plastic clay of desired
mould; scrapes off the surplus plaster-of
VOLUME II B 165
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
consistency; selects appropriate wooden ware from mould and places it in drying
mould (in 2 pieces) of desired type of toys, chamber, after checking defects, to form
figures, etc. to be made; presses wet mud and shape. May specialize in particular
or plastic clay or pours semi-liquid clay branch, i.e. figures, tea pots, sanitary
into mould and allows it to dry; wares, etc.
dismantles mould blocks carefully and
removes moulded figure or toy; fixes ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
required attachments to toys to make Code 7134
complete unit; gives finishing touches to Title Potters and Related Workers
pieces with blade and wet cloth to give
desired and distinct features and 7314.0500
smoothness and allows them to dry in
Maker (Pottery and
open sun or under shade; paints clay form
Porcelain)/Jigger and Jolly
with hand brush and desired colours to
Operator
give final touch. May dress toys or dolls
with appropriate dress and other
accessories such as hairs and ornaments. Maker; Jigger Man; Jolly Machine
May make simple toys by hand moulding Operator (Pottery and Porcelain) operates
by building form and features by deft use jigger or jolly machine for moulding damp
of fingers. and plastic clay or porcelain into articles
such as jars, cups, saucers, etc. Selects
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: proper shaping tool or metal die for
desired shape of ware and fits it to the
Code 7134
jollyarm of the machine; clamps mould
Title Potters and Related Workers
covered with flat sheet or clay into holder
of jigger or jolly; sets automatic screw to
7314.0400
obtain desired thickness of ware; starts
Moulder, Hand (Ceramics)
machine and releases pedal lever to allow
holder to rotate; lowers jollyarm on clay
Moulder, Hand (Ceramics) makes ceramic
to shape ware and applies wet sponge or
articles such as sanitary wares; abrasive
cloth as necessary to keep proper
wheels, bricks, tiles, etc. by pressing moist
consistency for shaping; turns hand lever
clay by hand in plaster of Paris or Wooden
in reverse direction to send back jollyarm
(Bihar) moulds and moulding it to desired
to its original position; depresses pedal to
shape or form. Kneads moist clay with
stop holder from rotating and removes
hands and feet or by shood (Bihar) to give
pressed and moulded article from
it required consistency or plasticity;
machine and places it at a nearby rack;
applies thin coating of oil or clay dust or
cleans holder and jollyarm with wet cloth
both, inside mould to prevent moist clay
or brush to remove stuck clay; repeats
sticking to surface when filled; presses
process. May fix handles and other
clay firmly into mould by hand, with
fixtures to finished product. May repair
mallet or by means of ramming tool to
and service machine.
pack mould uniformly; scraps off
projecting clay with sharp instrument to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
give moulded article smooth edge; allows
Code 7134
clay to remain in mould for short time to
Title Potters and Related Workers
dry and shrink slightly; removes semidry
VOLUME II B 166
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7314.0600 form mould. Weights out specified
Turner Pottery and Porcelain amounts of abrasive, compound and
adhesive, pours compound into mould on
rotating turntable, and inserts bushings
Turner, Pottery and Porcelain operates
and hub nuts in centre of mould to form
pattern wheel to trim to desired shape
wheel. Places top plate on mould,
unbaked pottery and porcelain ware
positions mould in press and turns valves
formed by Caster, Maker and Thrower
and leavers to close press and start
with appropriate hand tools. Fixes ware in
pressing cycle. Removes pressed wheels
wheel; sets and starts machine to rotate
from mould and places on plates for
piece; selects appropriate trimming tool
drying in kilns. May stamp or mark code
and presses and manipulates tool against
numbers on pressed wheels. May mix grit,
ware to obtain desired shape; removes
resin and clay to form abrasive
shaped ware from wheel. May smoothen
compound, using mixing machine. May be
and finish surface using sand paper.
designated according to type of abrasive
used such as DIAMOND WHEEL
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
MOULDER, EMERY-WHEEL MOULDER, etc.
Code 7134
Title Potters and Related Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7134
7314.0700
Title Potters and Related Workers
Bricks and Tile Moulder, Hand
7314.0900
Brick and Tile Moulder, Hand moulds by
Potter (Pottery and
hand bricks or tiles of various shapes and
Porcelain)/Potter's Wheel Operator
sizes using appropriate moulds. Smears
inside of mould with thin coating of oil or
dusts it with dry clay. Kneads lump of clay Potter; Thrower (Pottery and Porcelain)
to obtain proper consistency and throws it forms pottery or porcelain ware by
into mould. Presses clay into mould by moulding clay with hands as it revolves on
hand so as to fill in mould completely. the potters’ wheel. Places lump or soft
Scrapes off excess clay from mould and pliable clay in centre of flat wheel; rotates
turns mould upside down to remove wheel by foot or machine, or by giving few
moulded brick or tile. quick turns using stick; centres clay on
wheel by pressure of hands, and fashions
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ware of desired shape and size by
softening clay with water and
Code 7134
manipulating with hands; cuts ware from
Title Potters and Related Workers
base with wet thread and removes it for
drying. May knead, work and prepare clay
7314.0800
and bake wares in kiln. May trim dried
Abrasive Wheel Moulder
articles to desired shape by turning it
using cutting tools.
Abrasive-Wheel Moulder tends hydraulic
press to mould synthetic abrasive discs,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
hones and grinding wheels. Selects mould
Code 7134
parts according to size and thickness of
Title Potters and Related Workers
wheel desired and assembles parts to
VOLUME II B 167
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7314.1000
Granulator Attendant (Cement) 7314.1200
Checker (Ceramics)
Granulator Attendant, (Cement);
Nodulizer Man tends granulator (mixing Checker; Examiner; Sorter (Ceramics)
machine) to splash raw materials of examines pottery and porcelain ware by
cement with spray of water to produce touch and sight at different stages of
granules of material for burning in kiln. production, rejects defective pieces and
Starts machine and regulates feed to classifies goods according to quality.
material (Cement dust) into granulator;
sprays water into granulator through ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
water pipe while machine rotates at Code 7134
speed; observes mixing of material and Title Potters and Related Workers
water to determine if uniform granules
are being formed; regulates feed of 7314.1300
material, rotation of pelletizer amount of
Sorter, Brick and Tile
water spray, and heat of oven to insure
pellets are produced to specifications;
Sorter, Brick and Tile; Checker, Brick and
opens inspection ports on oven and
Tile sorts burned bricks, tiles or refractory
observes or removes pellets for
goods according to colour (shade),
examination to ensure specified hardness
hardness and quality. Removes product
and heat.
from kiln, examines it visually for colour,
hardness and shape; taps product with
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
finger or wooden rod to judge quality by
Code 7134
sound; discards broken pieces; sorts and
Title Potters and Related Workers
marks in chalk products according to
shade, quality, etc. May be designated
7314.1100
according to material sorted as BRICK
Clay Maker (Pottery) SORTER; TILE SORTER, etc.
Clay Maker (Pottery) prepares and makes ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
clay for making pottery articles. Mixes Code 7134
different types of clay manually or in Title Potters and Related Workers
mixing machine fitted with double shafts
and rollers; adds required quantity of 7314.9900
water for mixing clay; stacks clay in yards
Abrasive Wheel Formers, Potters
for curing and drying; checks by sight and
and Related Workers, Other
touch that moisture contents of clay are
to required standard for pressing; adds
Abrasive Wheel Formers, Potters and
more water if required; feeds conveyor
Related Workers, other include workers
with cured clay for dropping in mixing and
who make pottery, porcelain ware, bricks,
pug mill or feeds mill manually with clay.
tiles and abrasive wheels not elsewhere
classified.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7134
Title Potters and Related Workers
VOLUME II B 168
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: with either compressed air or own breath.
Code 7134 Shapes bends, or joins together sections
Title Potters and Related Workers of blown tubing using various glass
forming tools. Checks capacities of
apparatus to ensure correct specifications.
Family 7315 May work from drawings or other
specifications.
Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Finishers
Code 7315
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders
Glass makers, cutters, grinders and
and Finishers
finishers blow, mould, press, cut, trim,
grind and polish glass, shape molten glass
7315.0300
according to patterns.
Blower Helper (Glass)
7315.0100
Blower Helper (Glass) assists Blower in the
Blower, Glass
manufacture of glass articles. Dips bubble
prepared on blowpipe by Bubble Maker
Blower, Glass blows molten glass into
into molten glass and gathers required
shape by means of blowpipe. Receives
quantity of
blowpipe with molten glass from Blower
molten glass for type of article to be
Helper and shapes glass by blowing into
made. Rolls gathered glass in cup-shaped
and manipulating pipe or by blowing glass
metallic plate, containing water and oil to
into shape of mould. May specialize in
spread molten glass to bubble uniformly;
blowing any particular object and be
takes blowpipe with glass bubble, and
designated accordingly such as BOTTLE
hands over blowpipe to Blower for
BLOWER, BULB BLOWER, etc.
blowing desired article. May act as Blower
to mould required glass products when
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
necessary. Bubbler (Glass)gathers molten
Code 7315 glass from furnace on heated end of metal
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders blowpipe for blowing desired article by
and Finishers Blower. Heats one end of metal blowpipe,
dips it in tank of molten glass and rolls it
7315.0200 round together required quantity of
Blower, Laboratory Apparatus molten glass around its tip. Removes pipe
end from tank and rolls
Blower, Laboratory Apparatus; Table gathered glass over iron plate to give it
Blower (Glass) shapes glass tubing, by uniform shape. Checks shape of glass
blowing and bending, according to bubble at tip end and blows through pipe
specifications to form scientific apparatus to expand glass bubble slightly in size.
such as flasks, retorts, stills and pipettes. Cools glass bubble in air for some time
Obtains glass tubing of suitable bore and before further processing by Blower
length. Heats tubing to viscous condition Helper. Bubble Holder (Glass) air cools
by manipulating it over a Bunsen burner. glass bubble made by Bubble Maker.
Blows heated tubing into specified forms Blows gently by mouth through blowpipe
VOLUME II B 169
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
to expand bubble slightly, depending holds tube in flame at point where bend is
upon the size and shape of article to be desired, rotating tube to heat it uniformly.
produced. Rolls or waves blowpipe to air Places one end of rubber hose over end of
cool bubble. May work as BUBBLE MAKER, tube and the other end in his mouth;
when necessary. blows through hose to prevent tube from
collapsing and bends the tube. Places bent
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: tube on asbestos pattern to check
Code 7315 accuracy of bend, reheating and bending
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders glass, if necessary; fuses together sections
and Finishers of bent tubing. Cools bended tubing by
annealing it manually, ensuring uniform
7315.0600 wall thickness. May specialize in a
particular product and be designated
Mouldman (Glass)
accordingly.
Mouldman; Mould Catcher; Moulder
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
(Glass) opens and closes metal mould for
Code 7315
blowing of glass ware. Selects and places
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders
in position appropriate metal mould
and Finishers
according to size and shape of glass ware
to be produced. Heats mould to required
7315.0800
temperature to ensure that mould is not
too hot or cold when molten glass is Gatherer (Glass)
blown into it, with a view to prevent
cracking of glass. Opens mould to receive Gatherer (Glass) gathers specified amount
molten glass from tip of blowpipe and of molten glass on end of iron rod and
closes it; allows Blower to blow molten carries it to Pressman. Dips end of iron rod
glass to desired shape of mould, and or blowpipe into pot in furnace containing
opens mould after blowing is over to molten glass; collects required amount of
remove blowpipe. Cools mould to molten glass on end of rod or blowpipe
required temperature by pouring cold and carries it to Pressman for further
water to remove product. processing. May assist Blower by
preliminary shaping or blowing.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7315 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders Code 7315
and Finishers Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders
and Finishers
7315.0700
Bender (Glass) 7315.0900
Drawer (Glass)
Bender, Glass heats and bends glass
tubing or pipettes to form articles such as Drawer; Tarwala (Glass) draws molten
neon signs and other articles. Fixes glass into wire of desired thickness for
asbestos pattern on work bench. Marks making bangles. Heats parison
and cuts glass tubing with file and breaks (intermediate shape produced in the
off required length. Ignites gas burner and manufacture of a glass article in more
VOLUME II B 170
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
than one stage) in oven, attached to one components. May make test plates,
end of iron rod till glass becomes master and articulates by photographic
sufficiently viscous (semi-fluid); draws techniques, thin film multilayer vacuum
molten glass into thread to be wound into deposition for wide bend anti-reflection
coil on steel roller by Roller Man. and laser mirror coating.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7315 Code 7315
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders
and Finishers and Finishers
7315.1000 7315.1200
Bead Maker (Glass) Lens Grinder
Bead Maker (Glass) makes beads from Lens Grinder operates grinding machine
glass. Melts end of solid glass rod using to grind surfaces of lens blanks to
gas burner or furnace. Takes small globule required curvature and thickness. Selects
of molten glass on end of metal wire and metal grinding disc with required dioptric
spins wire till bead is formed, or rolls curve and clamps it on spindle of machine.
globule of glass in mould to form bead of Places metal block with mounted lens
desired size and shape. Cools and blank in position against grinding disc.
solidifies glass article by holding it over Starts machine and applies various grades
blast of compressed air. Opens mould and of abrasives or emery paste to disc as
removes beads. May make beads by required periodically during grinding
blowing process. process for surfacing the lens blank;
removes block from machine after
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: specified time and examines blanks for
Code 7315 defects. Uses different curvature metallic
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders discs for surfacing both sides of the lens
and Finishers blank in case of cylindrical or spherical
lenses. May mount blanks on metal block.
7315.1100
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Optical Worker
Code 7315
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders
Optical Worker cuts and grinds optical
and Finishers
components. Coats them by vacuum
deposition. Cements optical glass lenses;
7315.1300
etches, engraves and prints metals/non-
metals using photographic or ruling Edger (Optical glass)
techniques. Applies chemical and spray
techniques in assembly of optical Edger; Lens Edger (Optical Glass) grinds
instruments. Cuts blanks from and smoothens edges of lenses or lens
slabs/moulds and smothers and polishes blanks to reduce them to required size
on machine or by hand operation. Centres and shape. Selects metal pattern and
and edges the lenses. Carries out on line inserts it into head of edging machine.
stage and interline stage inspection of Inserts rubber faced pad in lens holder,
VOLUME II B 171
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
smears lens with oil and places lens in precision optical instruments, such as
holder. Aligns lens with pattern and telescope, microscope or camera and
clamps lens in holding device of machine. grinds their edges concentric with optical
Manipulates levers to press lens edge axis. Positions lens in cement bed in chuck
against rotating wet grind-stone and and sets chuck in spindle of lathe of
removes lens when grinding is complete. centring machine. Starts machine;
Measures and inspects work for observes in revolving lens light reflected
conformance to specifications. Smooths from mirror in machine; moves and
rough edges by holding lens against positions lens in cement bed until image
grinding wheel. May fit edged optical remains stationery denoting optical centre
lenses into spectacle frames. May also found. Hardens cement to secure lens in
dress grinding wheel. position and grinds edges to specified
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: degree over revolving abrasive grinding
Code 7315 stone. Inspects and measures work
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders frequently as grinding proceeds. May fit
and Finishers glasses in frame according to prescription.
May polish lens.
7315.1400
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Lens Polisher (Optical)
Code 7315
Lens Polisher (Optical) sets and operates
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders
machine to polish surfaces of lens blank to
and Finishers
high lustre. Selects and fits felt-lined
polishing mould of required size and
7315.1600
curvature on lower spindle of machine;
position block on which lens blanks are Wheel Grinder (Glass)
mounted against polishing tool; starts
machine and applies rouge or any other Wheel Grinder, Glass grinds and finishes
polishing compound to disc periodically rough edges of glass-white on flat grinding
during polishing process to polish blank to wheel. Examines glass articles processed
required level of lustre. Stops machine by Glass Cutter and collects pieces with
and removes block after specified time to uneven and rough edges for grinding.
examine blanks for defects. May operate Switches on grinding wheel, moistens
battery of polishing machines. May surface of wheel by pouring water, applies
operate cylindrical polishing machine. and maintains adequate supply of moist
emery powder or other suitable abrasive
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: on centre of wheel so that it spreads out
Code 7315 on its surface; holds by hand glass article
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders on revolving grinding wheel to smoothen
and Finishers rough and sharp edges. Checks article for
proper finish. Washes and cleans
7315.1500 processed article. May cut glass. May
polish surfaces.
Lens Centerer and Edger (Optical
Glass)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7315
Lens Centerer and Edger (Optical Glass)
locates optical centre of lenses used in
VOLUME II B 172
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders Cooling Man (Glass)
and Finishers
Cooling Man; Bench Man (Glass)
7315.1700 separates moulded glass articles from
Edge Finisher (Glass) blowpipe by chilling film of glass, joining
blowpipe and moulded article. Receives
moulded glass article fixed with blowpipe
Edge Finisher, (Glass) smoothens sharp
from Blower Glass; pours water on metal
and rough, edges of beakers flasks,
between tube and article and nipps off
tumblers and other glass articles by
glass to separate moulded article from
melting edges on glass flame. Sets edge
blowpipe. Removes glass article from
finishing machine, and lights gas burners
mould; counts number of articles and
in machine; places glass article on disc
passes them to carrier. May work as
which rotates through gas flame.
BUBBLER or MOULD CATCHER.
Regulates colour and intensity of flame by
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
manipulating valve. Starts machine to
rotate disc through flame to soften and Code 7315
smoothen edge. Stops machine to check Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders
smoothened surface; removes article with and Finishers
tong when smoothening is completed. 7315.2000
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Glass Cutter, Other
Code 7315
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders Glass Cutter, Other; Glass Cracker; Glass
and Finishers Trimmer cuts glass tubes, rods, sheets or
other articles to specified sizes and
7315.1800 shapes, using hand tools or cutting
Cutter, Glass Bangles machine. Lays stock of glass sheet, tubes
or rods on padded surface of table, places
pattern on glass article, marks out and
Cutter, Glass Bangles cuts glass-wire-coil
cuts pattern with glass cutter tool; breaks
into rings of required size with
away excess glass by hand or with
Carborundum (silicon carbide-hard
notched tool. Stocks cut part aside for
abrasive). Selects wooden rod of required
removal. May grind and smoothen edges,
size and girth and inserts it through glass-
using belt sander.
wire-coil; places wooden rod in position in
work bench and scratches across glass coil
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
with carborundum to cut into rings; draws
out cut bangles by hand and passes them Code 7315
for further processing. May join two ends Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders
of cut ring to form complete bangle. and Finishers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 7315.2100
Code 7315 Joiner, Glass Bangles
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders
and Finishers Joiner, Glass Bangles melts and joins both
ends of glass ring cut by Cutter, Glass
7315.1900 Bangles, using burner and blowpipe. Holds
ring by tong, heats unjoined ends over gas
VOLUME II B 173
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
flame or burner to melt glass; blows clogged material in machine with bar;
blowpipe to melted ends to fuse both large pieces with bar or hammer if
ends together to form glass bangles. necessary; regulates water valve to let out
requisite water into machine to settle
dust. May clean and oil machine.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7315 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders Code 7315
and Finishers Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders
7315.2200 and Finishers
Crusher Attendant, Stone
7315.2400
Crusher Attendant, Stone operates Sorter, Glass Products
machine in which lumps of stone are
crushed to reduce them to desired size. Sorter, Glass Products sorts finished glass
Starts machine and regulates flow of products for uniformity, size and quality.
stones from conveyor chutes or bins, Examines glass or glass ware for
shovels or throws stones into hopper of conformity to specification; measures and
machine; prods large sized stone pieces to checks dimensions, shape, patterns and
force them between crusher jaws with casting with measuring instruments or
bar; breaks oversize stones with hand gauges; scrutinizes product for cracks,
hammer; loosens clogged material in scratches, non-uniformity of colour and
machine with bar; places empty other flaws and sorts glass products into
containers at delivery-end to receive first second, third etc., quality depending
crushed materials; cleans, lubricates and upon finish of products; rejects imperfect
makes minor repairs to machine. May product and piles them separately. May
operate machine fitted with conveyor remove minor surface scratching by
system and may sieve powder into grinding surface with rouge and smooth
different grades. rough edges using belt sander.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7315 Code 7315
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders
and Finishers and Finishers
7315.2300 7315.9900
Grinder (Stone and Clay) Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders and
Finishers, Other
Grinder; Edge Runner Attendant (Stone
and Clay) tends and feeds grinding Glassmakers, Cutters, Grinders and
machine to grind pieces of rock or clay Finishers, other include workers who
into fine dust. Adjusts clearance between blow, mould, press and roll shapes from
rollers and bed stone (solid plate) of molten glass and cut, grind and polish
machine for fineness of grinding required; glass not elsewhere classified.
starts machine and feeds material into
machine with shovel breaking loosens ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 174
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Code 7315 Glass Etcher etches, with acid, decorative
Title Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders designs, calibration markings, numerals,
and Finishers lines and other markings on glass articles.
Prepares acid bath; dips waxed glass, on
which design or other markings have been
drawn, into acid bath, or exposes it to acid
fumes so that portions not covered with
Family 7316 wax will be eaten away; rinses etched
glass in cold water to remove acid and
Sign Writer, Decorative Painters, then in hot water to remove wax. May
coat articles with wax.
Engravers and Etchers
Sign Writers, Decorative Painters,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Engravers and Etchers decorate articles
made of wood, metal, textiles, glass, Code 7316
ceramics and other materials. They plan, Title Sign Writer, Decorative Painters,
lay out and paint letters, figures, Engravers and Etchers
monograms and designs to make signs
and engrave and etch ornament and floral 7316.0300
designs on glass and other articles. Sand Blaster (Glass)
7316.0100 Sand-Blaster; Froster Embosser; Obscuring
Machine Operators (Glass) cuts artistic
Engraver, Glass
designs, according to pattern, in surfaces
of glass articles, such as bowls and vases,
Engraver Glass; Glass Cutter engraves
using sand blasting equipment. Transfers
ornamental and floral designs,
drawing of desired design to outer side of
monographs etc. on glass ware using
adhesive tape; covers glass with tape, and
revolving copper or stone engraving
cuts design out of tape with knife to
wheel. Sketches or traces with crayon
uncover area of glass to be sand-blasted.
outline of design on surface of glass
Operates compressed air gun that blows
article; mounts copper or stone wheel of
fine sand against uncovered glass and cuts
proper width and diameter on machine;
design into or frosts surface. Removes
starts wheel; moistens revolving wheel
protective tape from glass. May make
with water; holds glass ware with both
freehand drawing of design to be cut. May
hands against outer edge of wheel, so that
blast design into inside of bowl or vase to
it grinds and cuts into glass surface along
create raised rather than sunken effect.
outline of traced or sketched design.
Changes wheels to make cuts of different
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sizes. May polish engraved pattern.
Code 7316
Title Sign Writer, Decorative Painters,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Engravers and Etchers
Code 7316
Title Sign Writer, Decorative Painters,
7316.0400
Engravers and Etchers
Volume Man/Calibrating
7316.0200 Technician
Glass Etcher
VOLUME II B 175
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Volume Man marks with special ink and
pen measurements and units on outer ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
surface of apparatus such as pipettes, Code 7316
burettes, flasks and measuring glasses for Title Sign Writer, Decorative Painters,
making permanent engraving on them. Engravers and Etchers
Positions glass article to be calibrated on
levelling stand and pours required volume 7316.0600
of water from automatic pipette. Marks
Glass Enameller
out base of water level on outer surface of
Glass Enameller; Glass Painter, Hand
article with special ink and pen; pours out
enamels, paints or stains decorative free-
water on completion of calibration and
hand designs on glass with hand brush
passes it to Waxing Man, Glass.
and paint. Draws outline of design on
surface of glass article; mixes paint,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
enamel or stain to obtain desired shade or
Code 7316
colours; places objects on work bench,
Title Sign Writer, Decorative Painters,
and applies paint or enamel of various
Engravers and Etchers
colours to it by hand-brush and according
to pattern. May place painted glass in
7316.0500
furnace for prescribed period, so that
Waxing Man (Glass)/Helper colours are fused to glass. May mix own
Calibrator/Decorator, Glass colours.
Waxing Man (Glass) applies coating of ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
melted wax on exterior surfaces of glass- Code 7316
ware previously marked by Volume Man Title Sign Writer, Decorative Painters,
to be graduated, by dipping articles in Engravers and Etchers
molten wax. Heats and melts paraffin-wax 7316.0700
cakes of specified quality in suitable vessel Hand Painter (Ceramics)
over heater; holds article, previously
marked by Volume Man with tongs and
Hand Painter (Ceramics) paints, free hand,
dips it in molten wax, holding it for
designs on pottery or porcelain ware or
required time to give exterior surface of
tiles, using small hand brushes, according
article thin uniform coating of wax.
to pattern. Marks outline of design on
Removes article from wax to dry and cool
surface of article with pencil; mixes paints
for further processing by Graduator.
to obtain desired shade or colours; places
Applies molten wax with brush to touch
object on work bench and applies paints
up unwaxed and defectively waxed
of various colours to it by hand brush and
portion of article. Scrapes off wax coating
according to pattern; keeps painted ware
from surface of etched articles. May apply
on rack to dry. May heat articles by
wax on article by pouring it on article from
placing them in racks of electrically
vessel.
operated ovens at required temperature
for fixed periods so that colours are fused
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to surface of object. May prepare own
Code 7316 designs. May mix own colours.
Title Sign Writer, Decorative Painters,
Engravers and Etchers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 176
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Code 7316 Title Sign Writer, Decorative Painters,
Title Sign Writer, Decorative Painters, Engravers and Etchers
Engravers and Etchers
7316.1000
7316.0800 Glazer, Pottery and Porcelain
Decorator (Ceramics)
Decorator (Ceramics) transfer from paper Glazer, Pottery and Porcelain coats by
transfer decorative or ornamental designs dipping biscuit ware (pottery articles after
on pottery or porcelain ware. Selects firing but before glazing) with glaze
paper transfer of suitable or specified solution. Cleans ware such as dish, plate
design, and according to size and shape of or saucer to remove dust by spraying it
the pottery; applies varnish to the surface with air gun or dusting it with clean cloth.
of the pottery on which design is to be Checks and rejects articles with cracks and
transferred; applies and presses the other defects. Holds articles with tongs or
paper-transfer skilfully and uniformly, fingers and dips it in tub containing liquid,
avoiding any air-gap between the surface glaze; stirs liquid solution with hand or
of article and paper transfer; dips the stirring rod thoroughly from time to time
article in water, removes the paper, and to acquire desired thickness of glaze
wipes off the extra varnish on the surface coating; removes it from tub and holds it
of article; dries the article for further just above surface of liquid, turning article
firing. May prepare own designs. around to ensure even coating and to
throw off excess glaze; places ware on
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: rack to dry and rubs glaze over spot where
Code 7316 tongs or fingers touched; removes excess
Title Sign Writer, Decorative Painters, glaze from dry ware by rubbing it with a
Engravers and Etchers buffing wheel or other implement. May
7316.0900 apply liquid glaze with spray gun on large
pieces which cannot be easily dipped in a
Spray Painter, (Ceramics)
solution.
Spray Painter (Ceramics) sprays paint on
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
pottery, porcelain ware, bricks, tiles, or
Code 7316
sprays liquid glaze on large pieces which
Title Sign Writer, Decorative Painters,
cannot be dipped easily in a solution. Fills
Engravers and Etchers
container of spray gun with paint or glaze
of desired colour; fixes container to spray
7316.1100
gun and couples gun to air-hose; starts
compressor or opens valve on Mirror Silverer
compressed air line; presses trigger and
directs spray of liquid over surfaces of Mirror Silverer, Silverer Mirror coats new
objects; places ware on rack to dry; cleans and old mirror glass with silvering
gun and hose with solvents. May use solutions. Weighs and mixes ingredients
stencils for spraying various designs on according to formula to prepare silvering
objects. May mix own colours. solution of required consistency; places
cleaned mirror glass on silvering table;
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: covers surface of glass with silvering
Code 7316 solution and levels glass by means of
VOLUME II B 177
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
wedges so that solution may not run off; weavers, brush makers and related
allows silvering solution to remain on workers select and prepare materials like
glass for prescribed period, drains excess bristles, nylon, fibre, bass, whisker and
of solution from glass and washes silvered wire to make wicker furniture, brushes
glass in distilled water; dries mirror on and brooms and weave various kinds of
drying table; coats silvered surface of baskets.
glass with copper solution and protective
paint to protect silvering from moisture. 7317.0100
May spray silvering solution over glass Lamp Shade Maker
surface using spray gun.
Lamp Shade Maker makes lamp shades
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
from cardboard, parchment, plastics or
Code 7316 cloth. Selects frames of required shapes
Title Sign Writer, Decorative Painters, and sizes. Cuts material of desired design
Engravers and Etchers to fit frame; winds tape spirally over
upper and lower rings of frame to form
7316.1200 foundation for attaching material; pins
Sign Writer, Decorative Painters, covering material between rings,
Engravers and Etchers, Other distributing it evenly; sews temporary
stitches to material around lower wire and
then top wire, pulling material taunt; sews
Glass, Ceramics and Related Decorative
material permanently to frame using
Painters, Other include workers who
various stitches depending on whether
decorate articles made of wood, metal,
material is plain, rippled or pleated; trims
textile, glass, ceramics and other
off excess material with pair of scissors
materials, and plan, lay out and paint
and sews in lining; sews trimming around
letters and designs to make signs not
top and bottom edges of shade or
elsewhere classified.
attaches trimmings to lamp shades. Glues
parts of shades together, and secures
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
shades made of paper, parchment or
Code 7316
other materials into pre-fabricated wire
Title Sign Writer, Decorative Painters,
frames. May fabricate wire frames by
Engravers and Etchers
intertwining, welding together metal
wires.
Family 7317
Handicraft Workers in Wood, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Basketry and Related Materials Code 7317
Title Handicraft Workers in Wood,
Handicraft workers in wood and related Basketry and Related Materials
materials apply traditional techniques like
seasoning, impregnation to prepare wood, 7317.0300
straw, rattan, reeds, stone, clay, shells, Furniture Maker, Bamboo
and other materials, and carve, mould,
assemble, weave, or paint and decorate Furniture Maker, Bamboo makes bamboo
various articles for personal or household furniture by sizing and dressing bamboo
use, or for decorative purposes. Basketry pieces, drilling holes, building frames and
VOLUME II B 178
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
body with strengthening pieces. Studies Title Handicraft Workers in Wood,
pattern, size or design of furniture to be Basketry and Related Materials
made; collects seasoned bamboo stakes
(rods) them and soaks in water; removes 7317.0500
stakes from bath when soft and cuts and Furniture Maker, Cane
removes thin splints and splits them into
strips of desired size and thickness with
Furniture Maker, Cane makes cane
selects cut bamboo into specific sizes,
furniture by sizing and dressing required
drills holes where necessary and sets
cane pieces, bending them to shape by
them into required pattern; completes
heating, fastening parts together with
object by weaving seat, back and other
cane strips and nailing. Studies pattern,
parts as necessary and fastening ends
size and design of furniture to be made;
either with bamboo or cane strips. May
selects cane rods, cuts them to required
specialize in a particular article such as
length; shaves out pieces to remove
Table, Chair, Sofa set, etc. May also
projections, heats frame pieces and other
undertake repair work.
sticks with blow torch, and bends them to
desired shape; fastens sticks together with
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
bolts, nails, and screws; weaves wickers in
Code 7317 through and around frame cutting off and
Title Handicraft Workers in Wood, concealing or weaving together loose
Basketry and Related Materials ends to finish edges; winds wickers
around joints to strengthen and conceal
7317.0400 them. May do polishing or painting of
Furniture Maker, Reed furniture. May fit cushions in chairs, sofa
sets, etc. May undertake repair work of
Furniture Maker, Reed makes reed old furniture. May be designated
furniture by sizing and dressing reeds and according to article or part of furniture
weaving them with rope to desired fabricated as BACK MAKER; CHAIR
pattern. Studies pattern, size or design of MAKER; SEAT MAKER.
furniture to be made; collects material,
cuts them into required length and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
fastens them together with strings to Code 7317
desired shape; cuts off, conceals or Title Handicraft Workers in Wood,
weaves together loose ends, to finish Basketry and Related Materials
edges; completes object by setting and
fastening dry grass on handles, top, 7317.0600
bottom and edges with rope. May use Caner
rexine or leather for decoration and
durability on bottom, top, and handles.
Caner interweaves cane strips to make
May specialize in fabricating a particular
seat, back etc., of chairs, sofa sets and
article or part of furniture and be
similar furniture. Soaks pre-cut rattan
designated accordingly.
stakes (rods) in water to soften and
bleach; removes stakes from bath when
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
soft, cuts and removes splints and splits
Code 7317 them into strips of desired size and
thickness; interlaces strips through and
VOLUME II B 179
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
around frame of furniture to be made 7317.0800
according to pattern, cutting off and Mat Weaver, Bamboo
concealing or weaving together loose
ends to finish edges; winds wickers
Mat Weaver, Bamboo makes mats of
around joints to strengthen and conceal
seasoned and coloured bamboo strips
them. May specialize in weaving a
according to pattern or design. Soaks pre-
particular article.
cut bamboo stakes in water to soften and
bleach them; removes stakes from bath
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
when soft, cuts and removes splints and
Code 7317 splits them into strips of desired size and
Title Handicraft Workers in Wood, thickness; dresses bamboo strips to
Basketry and Related Materials remove sharpness; colours strips
according to desired pattern and weaves
7317.0700 them into mat, cutting off and concealing
Basket Maker or weaving together loose ends to finish
edges; weaves thicker strips and
Basket Maker makes baskets of specified ornamental borders on edge or end of
size and shape by interlacing willow, mat. May make own designs. May weave
rattan or other materials. Forms bottom window and door screens. May make
of basket by interlacing strips of bamboo fans, fruit baskets etc.
or similar material with framework of
bamboo ribs; inserts ribs around edge of ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
bottom and between woven sections of Code 7317
bottom to serve as framework of sides; Title Handicraft Workers in Wood,
bends ribs perpendicular to bottom and Basketry and Related Materials
secures to hold them in position for 7317.0900
weaving of sides; weaves strips through Mat Weaver, Grass and Leave
ribs until sides are completed; tapers or
points ends of protruding ribs, and bends
Mat Weaver, Grass and Leaves makes mat
and inserts them into spaces in top edge
from palm, coconut tree leaves and grass
of woven sides. May make solid bottom
materials. Removes central rib from
boards, using band saw, drill press, and
leaves, dries the leaves in sun to remove
carpenters' hand tools. May interlace
extra moisture; cuts and dresses leaves to
reeds through stakes (rods), secured in
desired size; inter-weaves dressed leaves
screw blocks, to form parts of basket, such
to form mat of required size and design,
as woven bottom. May design baskets.
cutting off and concealing or weaving
May be designated according to type of
together loose ends to finish edges. May
basket woven as HAMPER MAKER;
stitch them with twine for strength and
MARKET-BASKET MAKER; or according to
durability.
material used as RATTAN WORKER;
WILLOW WORKER.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7317
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Handicraft Workers in Wood,
Code 7317
Basketry and Related Materials
Title Handicraft Workers in Wood,
Basketry and Related Materials
7317.1000
VOLUME II B 180
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Broom Maker Khas Thatti Maker makes Khas Thatties;
(screens made with Khas) a type of
Broom Maker fastens material such as aromatic grass roots used for keeping
palm leaves, coconut leaf ribs, broom- room cool form summer heat when cold
grass or bamboo wickers together or to water is sprinkled on them. Collects dry
broom handles with rope or wire to form khas roots; prepares bamboo frames of
brooms. Selects and sorts material required size; spreads layers of khas roots
according to length and quality of broom to make bed of required thickness and
to be made; examines and removes stems fastens it into bamboo frame with
which are short, broken or do not bamboo splinters to support on both sides
otherwise meet standards; arranges and and binds them with thin rope or sutli;
fastens material together or around end trims edges to complete screen.
of wooden handle by winding and stapling
wire, rope, leather or metal strips; trims ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
broom material to uniform length. May be Code 7317
designated according to type of broom Title Handicraft Workers in Wood,
made or material used. Basketry and Related Materials
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 7317.1300
Code 7317 Brush Material Preparer
Title Handicraft Workers in Wood,
Basketry and Related Materials Brush Material Preparer prepares hog
bristles and other brush filling materials,
such as horsehair, nylon and vegetable
7317.1100 fibres for use in brushes. Aligns bristles to
Chick Maker ensure that flagged ends are together and
discards defective ones. Ties bundle of
Chick Maker makes reed or bamboo bristles to prevent bending and places it
chicks by sizing and dressing reeds or on rack. Lowers rack of bundles into vat of
bamboo wickers and fastening together boiling water to remove natural curl of
by twine. Collects material, cuts and sizes bristle. Removes rack after specified time
them into thin strips according to design; and places it on dolly or in oven to dry.
assembles and fastens strips together Places bundle of bristles in carton and
with thin rope or twine to form into mat labels carton according to length, origin,
of desired size; trims edges and fixes cloth grade and colour of contents. Prepares
piping on four sides. May stitch coloured other brush-filling materials by
cloth over chicks. straightening, combing, cutting and tying
them according to type of material and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: intended use. Holds bundle of material
against grinding wheel to flag ends to trim
Code 7317
butt ends, and to polish material. Selects
Title Handicraft Workers in Wood,
filling material according to formula and
Basketry and Related Materials
lays it on work bench in prescribed
manner prior to processing by mixing
7317.1200
machine. May sterilise bristles and pack
Khas Thatti Maker
material in carton.
VOLUME II B 181
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Handicraft workers in textile, leather and
Code 7317 related materials apply traditional
Title Handicraft Workers in Wood, techniques and patterns to produce
Basketry and Related Materials woven fabrics, knitted, embroidered,
woven and other garments and articles for
7317.1400 household use, as well as traditional
footwear, handbags, belts and other
Brush Maker, Hand
accessories.
Brush Maker, Hand selects and prepares
7318.0100
brush materials, such as bristles, fibre,
nylon or wire, and sets them in brush Candle Maker
handle or base. Grades and mixes filling
material according to type of brush made Candle Maker, Hand makes candle of
and cleans and otherwise prepares it; special size or shapes by hand, dipping
sorts and arranges material in tufts; prepared wicks in molten wax, paraffin or
inserts them in prepared holes and similar material. Suspends candle wicks
secures them with glue, cement, pitch or from metal frame and manipulates pulley
wire; trims brush material to uniform system by hand to dip wicks into molten
length. May be designated according to wax, paraffin or similar material until
type of brush made or material used. required thickness of wax adheres to
wicks; removes and rolls candles under
"rolling board", nibs end in "nibbing
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: board", cuts to length, and places in racks
Code 7317 to harden.
Title Handicraft Workers in Wood,
Basketry and Related Materials ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7318
7317.9900 Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
Basketry Weavers, Brush Makers Leather and Related Materials
and Related Workers, Other
7318.0200
Candle Moulder
Basketry Weavers, Brush Makers and
Related Workers, Other include all other
workers who make wicker furniture, Candle Moulder operates battery of
brushes and brooms and weave baskets multiple moulding machines in which
not elsewhere classified. candles are produced in metal moulds
through which continuous wicks are
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: fitted. Opens valve which fills moulds
container with hot water, and fills
Code 7317
moulding trough with hot liquid wax,
Title Handicraft Workers in Wood,
using metal pail or metal ladle; operates
Basketry and Related Materials
valves which empty hot water from
Family 7318
moulding trough and refill with cold water
Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
for cooling wax; allows poured material to
Leather and Related Materials
harden in mould; cuts top of continuous
wicks with long bladed knife; removes
VOLUME II B 182
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
excess of candle material in moulding Knitting-machine Operator, Automatic
trough with special bottom-cutting tool (Knitting) operates knitting machines to
which shaves bottom of candles in mould knit hose to shape of foot and leg: Places
and also cuts off wick; operates handle to spools of yarn on spindles of machine and
eject candles up and into clamp frame threads machine. Places welt rod in
above machine; carries away finished retaining notch of welt bar and turns lever
candles and stacks in storage racks ready to lower welt bar to knitting position.
for packing; replaces bobbins of Pushes yarn carrier into position and turns
continuous wicks in base of machine and bar to start machine to knit welt. Hooks
fits through candle mould as necessary. draw-off straps from take-up roller to welt
rod to hold welt and leg taut during
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: knitting. Turns hand wheels to position
Code 7318 picot bar to knit stitches joining welt to leg
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, of hose and to raise picot and welt bars
Leather and Related Materials after welt is knitted. Stops machine and
clips loose threads at welt and toe of
7318.0300 completed hose, using scissors. Removes
welt rods and hose from machine. Counts,
Carpet Weaver (Carpet and Rug)
bundles, and attaches identifying ticket to
hose. Replaces and aligns needles and
Carpet Weaver (Carpet and Rug) operates
points of machine, using pliers. May clean
one or more looms equipped with pile-
and oil machine.
wire mechanism to weave carpeting:
Moves lever to open shed and inserts
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
specified number of pile wires through
Code 7318
shed in sequence to produce pile. Forces
Title Handicraft
cop of filling into shuttle, using mallet, and
Workers in Textiles, Leather and Related
inserts shuttle into loom. Places wax in
Materials
holder to lubricate pile wires as wires
enter and are withdrawn from shed.
Starts loom and observes weaving to
7318.0500
detect exhausted filling packages,
mispicks, and irregular cutting of pile. Hand Printer, Textile/Hand Block
Replaces exhausted filling, inserts pile Printer
wires into missed loops, and replaces dull
cutting blades. May be designated Hand Printer, Textile prints patterns of
according to type of carpet woven as various designs and shades on textiles by
Velvet Weaver (carpet and rug). hand using blocks, stencils, screen, spray
gun etc. Mixes dyes to desired shade and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: thickness. May be known as CALICO
Code 7318 PRINTER if engaged in printing cloth only.
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
Leather and Related Materials ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7318
7318.0400 Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
Knitting-Machine Operator, Leather and Related Materials
Automatic
VOLUME II B 183
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7318.0600 7318.0900
Hand Dyer Bale Breaker Tenter,
Cotton/Blowroom Operator
Hand Dyer bleaches and dyes textile fabric
or yarn by hand. Fills tub with water and Bale Breaker Tenter, Cotton; Bale Opener,
mixes chemicals to make bleaching Cotton; Lattice Feeder, Cotton tends bale
solution of required strength according to breaking machine for opening and mixing
type and quality of fabric or yarn to be cotton of various grades and partially
bleached. Washes fabric or yarn in cleaning it. Presses switch to start bale
solution and then rinses it with water. breaking machine. Pulls out and collects
Spreads fabrics or yarn to dry., Prepares armful of cotton layers from stack and
dye solution by mixing dyes and chemicals spreads it on creeper lattice of machine
with water in tub. Boils dye solution when for breaking and uniform mixing. Ensures
necessary. Puts fabric or yarn in solution regular feeding of cotton into lattice in
and stirs it until dyed evenly and to prescribed proportion; Stops machine if
required shade. Spreads fabric or yarn on jammed with cotton. Removes surplus
line to dry. May also dry yarn in drying cotton and regulates feed to avoid further
chamber. jamming. Restarts machine and watches
operation of cleaning by beater and exit of
cotton through delivery cage under
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: guidance of Mistry. Cleans waste, trash
Code 7318 and dust periodically from dust chamber.
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, Removes wastes cotton from machine and
Leather and Related Materials cleans machine. May perform any other
miscellaneous work in blow room.
7318.0800
Repairer, Fabrics/Fabric Mender ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7318
Repairer, Fabrics repairs faults in textile Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
fabrics by plucking out knots and replacing Leather and Related Materials
broken or imperfect threads using hand
tools. Inspects fabrics for markings that 7318.1000
indicate faults. Plucks out knots with hand Batching Worker, Wool
tool and gathers up slacks on loosely
woven threads. Replaces broken or Batching Worker, Wool; Batching
imperfect threads with needle and thread, Supervisor, Wool checks bags of wool
in such a way as to make repair invisible. received from godown to ensure correct
May examine fabrics. (Excluded are quality, colour and weight of wool to be
workers employed mainly on repairing mixed and supervises batching work.
fabrics by sewing). Receives bags of wool from stores and
checks them for correct specifications.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Allots bags of wool to Batching Man and
Code 7318 directs him to spread wool of different
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, quality, colour and weight in layers one
Leather and Related Materials upon another in required proportion to be
mixed. Supervises mixing of wool by
VOLUME II B 184
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Batching Man and checks formation of different grades of jute separately for
batch to ensure that wool of correct classification. Prepares jute by twisting
quality, colour and weight is used. ends of form Morahes (twisted jute) for
Maintains record of quantity and quality stacking. May cut long and hard roots with
of wool received from store and batches knife. May carry jute to Softener Feeder
formed. Controls and supervises work of for processing.
Batching Man and Teaser Man.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 7318
Code 7318 Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, Leather and Related Materials
Leather and Related Materials
7318.1300
7318.1100 Grader, Coir
Wool Sorter
Grader, Coir sorts coir yarn according to
Wool Sorters; Wool Picker sorts and grade. Examines thickness and colour
grades wool according to length, colour hanks of coir yarn and separates them
and quality of wool judging by touch and into lots accordingly.
sight. Picks fleece and wool and breaks
them by hand into pieces. Separates them ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
into heap according to colour, quality, etc. Code 7318
Picks out foreign matter such as sticks, Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
knots etc. May use knife for cutting out Leather and Related Materials
sewn edges of old garments and removing
unwanted portion. 7318.1500
Waste Machine Man (Cotton
Textile)/Waste Collection Machine
Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7318
Waste Machine Man (Cotton Textile)
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
tends machine for cleaning cotton waste
Leather and Related Materials
for re-use by beating and pulling it apart.
Lifts waste roving, yarn or other matted
7318.1200
cotton and spreads it on feeder apron or
Selector, Jute
lattice of waste machine. Takes out by
hand surplus cotton from machine when
Selector, Jute opens bales of jute and
machine becomes jammed. Stores
sorts, grades and classifies contents
cleaned cotton in gunny bags. Cleans and
according to colour, softness, strength
oils machine. Is designated as WILLOW
and texture. Receives bales of jute from
TENTER; ROVING WASTE OPENER;
godown and cuts ropes of bales with knife
THREAD EXTRACTOR MAN; BONDA
to open them. Spreads jute on floor
MACHINE MAN; etc. according to type of
manually, picks up samples to examine
machine on which worked.
softness, strength, texture and colour of
fibres by touch and sight and places
VOLUME II B 185
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: boiling water with wooden stick to which
Code 7318 they get attached. Collects in ladle
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, cocoons whose filaments are drawn out.
Leather and Related Materials Delivers such cocoons at reeling section
for Reeler to draw silk. May reel silk over
7318.1800 reeling machine.
Scouring Man, Wool/Wool
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Washing and Scouring Operator
Code 7318
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
Scouring Man, Wool; Scouring Machine
Leather and Related Materials
Man, Wool; Scourer, Wool tends scouring
machine for washing raw wool in chemical
7318.2000
solution to prepare it for dyeing and
Softener Feeder and Receiver, Jute
carding. Receives instructions from
Scouring Supervisor and prepares
chemical solution by mixing soda, soap Softener Feeder and Receiver Jute tends
and other scouring agents in proper softener machine for moistening and
proportion in hot water tank. Pours it into softening jute. Starts softening machine,
bowls of machine. Operates scouring picks up handful of jute (moral) or jute
machine and uniformly spreads wool by cuttings placed near feed-end of machine
hand on feeder hopper of machine to and places it evenly upon travelling apron
obtain even flow of wool at delivery end. or lattice of softening machine. Ensures
Regulates flow of wool from one bowl to that jute is uniformly and continuously
another. Collects clean wool at delivery fed. Stops machine when choked and
end and feeds wool on lattice of drying removes surplus jute to clear choking.
machine. Regulates flow of feeds and Receives softened stricks or portion of
removes wool from drying rollers. Cleans jute while working at receiving end, and
machine and bowls periodically. gives twist to stricks lunch of handled jute.
Ties them up and places them on barrow
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: or semi-cylindrical containers for removal
for further processing. Watches steady
Code 7318
flow of emulsion through valve to ensure
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
required quantum of moisture for
Leather and Related Materials
processing as directed. Cleans and oils
machine and reports defects in machine
7318.1900
for rectification. May bring sorted jute
Cooker (Silkworm)
from bins and stack it near feed-end of
machine.
Cooker (Silkworm) boils cocoons to kill
pupa inside cocoon and trace end of silk
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
filament for reeling silk. Fills tube
Code 7318
containing water with cocoons and lets in
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
steam to heat it. Allows cocoons to
Leather and Related Materials
remain in boiling water for specified
period. Ensures that all pupa inside
7318.2100
cocoon are killed and water is kept at
Root Cutter, Jute
prescribed temperature. Stirs cocoons and
VOLUME II B 186
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Root Cutter, Jute cuts hard and surplus 7318.2300
roots of jute by knife. Carries softened Fibre Preparer, Coir
jute from file to root cutting knife. Picks
up handful of softened jute and arranges
Fibre Preparer Coir prepares fibre from
hard and surplus jute ends evenly. Places
coconut husks. Dumps coconut husks in
root ends over knife at Breaker dollop
convenient place in lake, covers them
table, clips them off and carries root
completely on top with strong net or palm
cuttings to weighing scale. Ensures that
leaves and places stones over dump to
usable jute is not cut and wasted. May
sink coconut husks under water. Keeps
carry jute to softening machine. Is
dump under water for specified period.
designated as CHOPPER, JUTE if engaged
Removes husks (now called retted husk)
in chopping off hard root ends of special
from water to open space to drain off
quality jute by heavy knife and combing
water. Holds one small piece of retted
large morah (twisted jute) prior to
husk on wooden block with one hand and
selection by Selector, Jute.
beats it with iron or wooden rod with
other to release fibres from husk. Pulls out
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
outer cover of husk by hand. Continues
Code 7318 beating till all fibres in husk are released.
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, Spreads fibres in sun for drying. Collects
Leather and Related Materials dried fibre in one place, beats them with
long thin stick; removes remnant of pith; if
7318.2200 any and loosens and softens fibre. May
Teaser (Feeder and Receiver) Jute spin coir yarn from fibre by hand or hand
spinning wheel (charkha).
Teaser (Feeder and Receiver), Jute tends
teasing machine which breaks up matted ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
jute fibre and remove dust and foreign Code 7318
matter. Starts teaser machine. Picks up Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
handful of waste jute, cuttings, hard roots, Leather and Related Materials
thread waste, ropes, etc. placed near feed
end and spreads them evenly on lattice of 7318.2700
machine. Ensures continuous feeding to Card Tenter, Cotton/Carding Tenter
obtain regular flow of teased and cleaned
jute and delivery end. Stops machine
Card Tenter, Cotton; Liner; Can Carrier;
when jammed and removes surplus jute
Can Minder; Can Boy (Cotton Textile)
to clear obstruction. Reports defect if any
tends carding machine which cleans and
for rectification. Receives teased and
transforms lap of cotton into sliver (rope
cleaned jute at delivery end. May carry
like untwisted strand). Fixes and adjusts
teased material to breaker feeding line.
laps of cotton on brackets at back of
May also oil and clean machine.
machine for carding. Places end of lap (roll
of cotton sheet) between feed roll and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
feed plate. Places empty cans in front
Code 7318 machine to receive sliver. Starts and
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, cleans machine after stripping (removing
Leather and Related Materials of short fibres) of cylinder and doffer done
by Card Strippers. Collects web (thin fibres
VOLUME II B 187
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
formed of matted fibres), ensuing from feeds them on to rollers through guides by
doffer, threads it through calender rolls hand. Starts machine, watches sliver ends
and pieces (joins) with sliver in can. running through machine and joins
Ensures regular feeding of cotton into broken ends. Maintains continuous flow
machine and attends to breaks in web and of sliver by regular feed avoiding jamming.
sliver front (delivery end). Replaces filled Stops machine when jammed and draws
cans with empty ones. Removes filled cans out surplus sliver to clear jamming. Moves
to draw-frame section and fetches empty wheel with hand to remove lap cover.
ones. Locates operational defects in Pulls out spindle wheel to facilitate
machine, and sets them right. Reports removal of lap at delivery end. Removes
major defects to Jobber for rectification. lap from delivery disc and places it on
Cleans and oils machine. creel and re-fixes bobbin, cover, etc.
Starts machine to transform lap. Cleans
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: machine and removes sliver dropping.
Code 7318 Locates operational defects on machine
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, and removes them. May carry lap to
Leather and Related Materials Ribbon-Lap-Man of Comber and bring
back empty spools. May tend ribbon-lap-
7318.2800 machine.
Set Framer, Silk
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7318
Set Framer, Silk operates set frame
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
machine to make silk into silver. Switches
Leather and Related Materials
on set frame to move comb up and down
which carries fibres through it. Feeds silk
7318.3400
laps one after another. Pieces broken
ends with hand to keep continuous flow. Comb Minder/Combing
Condenses fibres coming out through Preparatory Operator
trumpet (part of machine) into one sliver.
Oils and cleans machine. Comb Minder; Comber (Woollen Textile)
tends combing machine for combing wool
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: to remove foreign matter and to separate
Code 7318 short fibres from long fibres required for
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, worsted yarn. Places balls of sliver on
Leather and Related Materials creel of machine. Passes ends of sliver
from balls through guides and places ends
7318.2900 on comb circle. Starts machine and
Sliver-Lap-Man/Combing threads sliver, coming out of drawing
rollers, through funnel into can at delivery
Preparatory Operator
end. Joins broken ends and places new
balls on creel of machine when necessary
Sliver-Lap-Man; (Cotton Textile) tends
Replaces full cans with empty ones at
sliver lap-machine to convert several
delivery end. Removes noil (short fibres of
slivers into single lap for feeding ribbon
wool separated from longer fibres by
lap or combing machine. Collects and
combing) from underneath machine. Oils
arranges sliver cans at feed end of sliver-
and cleans machine.
lap-machine. Pulls out ends of slivers and
VOLUME II B 188
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
and transform jute into sliver. Starts
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: machine and feeds jute by hand to lattice
Code 7318 feeder of machine to carry hard jute
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, through rollers, fast chain, slow chain, etc.
Leather and Related Materials for softening and transforming jute into
sliver. Spreads jute by hand, uniformly on
7318.3500 lattice. Watches indicator to check weight
for regulating feed. Switches off machine
Gill Box Man
when jammed and pulls out surplus or
jammed jute by hand to clear jamming.
Gill-Box-Man; Gill-Box Minder (Woollen
Cleans and oils machine. May work on
Textile) tends gill-box machine for placing
jute softener machine.
wool fibres in line and blending several
slivers of wool into one sliver of uniform
thickness. Places cans or balls of sliver in
positions on floor at feed end of machine.
Takes ends of sliver from each can or ball,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
passes them through back roller, and
Code 7318
squeezes them through gathering eye to
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
front roller. Starts machine Passes end of
Leather and Related Materials
sliver combing out at delivery end through
guide into receiving can or loops it around
7318.3700
spindle or empty bobbin. Watches
processing from feed to delivery end. Spreader, Receiver, Jute
Joins broken ends as and when necessary.
Fixes new balls to replace exhausted balls Spreader Receiver, Jute removes balls of
at feed end to ensure regular feed. jute sliver from delivery end of goods jute
Removes fibres from leather sheet after spreader machine and carries them to
sopping machine when jammed. Collects Breaker Feeder. Guides flow of jute by
processed sliver and removes filled cans, hand into Emerson tray. Sprays emulsion
wound balls or full bobbins at delivery (Emerson solution) through pipe to
end. Removes waste from machine and moisten jute. Observes Emerson watch
leather sheet. Cleans machine. May reading and regulates feed of solution
operate finishing gill-box-machine on according to requirement. Watches
which sliver balls are fixed at creel and formation of sliver lap into rolls by
bobbin at delivery end. automatic roll former. Avoids jamming at
delivery end. Removes sliver roll from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: automatic roll stand and carries it to feed
Code 7318 end of breaker feeder machine for further
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, processing. Cleans delivery end of
Leather and Related Materials spreader. May tend spreader feeder
machine.
7318.3600
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Spreader Feeder, Jute
Code 7318
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
Spreader Feeder, Jute tends goods jute
Leather and Related Materials
spreader machine to spread, smoothen
VOLUME II B 189
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Spinning. Cleans top clearers and
7318.3800 machine.
7318.4000
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7318.4200
Code 7318
Hand Spinner (Cotton and Woollen
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
Textile)
Leather and Related Materials
Hand Spinner, (Cotton and Woollen
7318.4500
Textile) spins yarn from cotton or wool
Spinner, Jute
using ‘charkha' (spinning wheel). Loops
small length of yarn around spindle of
Spinner, Jute tends number of spindles on
charkha, holds end of yarn length along
spinning frame for converting jute sliver
with sliver of cotton or wool in left hand,
received from drawing frame into yarn.
turns spinning wheel by right hand
Arranges s liver cans at back or spinning
simultaneously withdrawing left hand
frame. Lowers spindles on frame and
slowly to draw and spin yarn. Stops
directs Doffer to fit empty bobbins on
charkha when arm length of yarn has
spindles. Pulls, ends of sliver on bobbins
been drawn and spun and winds yarn on
and passes them through guides and
spindle. Removes cop of yarn from spindle
drafting rollers. Switches on spinning
when it is full. May also spin yarn using
frame to get slivers spun and converted
'Takli'(hand spinning spindle).
into yarn. Pieces (joins) broken ends and
ensures regular flow of slivers from cans.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Replaces filled bobbins by empty ones.
Code 7318
Checks jamming of machine, removes
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
surplus jute yarn, and ensures that
Leather and Related Materials
machine and bobbins run properly. Cleans
and oils machine.
7318.4300
Piecer
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7318
Piecer; Ring Spinner; Ring Piecer; Sider
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
(Cotton and Woollen Textile) tend number
Leather and Related Materials
of spindles on ring frame for converting
rovings into spun yarn. Puts bobbins filled
7318.4600
on inter or roving machines in creel of ring
Spinner, Coir
machine and threads ends through guides
and drafting rollers. Locates broken ends
Spinner, Coir spins coir yarn from coconut
of yarn, lifts bobbin from live spindle and
fibres by using spinning wheel. Collects
unreels some yarn from it, replaces
small quantity of fibre and puts it in lap,
bobbin on spindle, threads yarn through
Loops fibre on spindle of spinning wheel.
guide and ring traveller and joins it with
Rotates wheel by turning its handle. Walks
other end. Replaces empty roving bobbins
backward with twisted fibre in hand and
in creel with filled ones, joining tail end
feeds required fibre from lap to form coir
with leading end. Gets filled yarn bobbins
yarns. Stops rotation of wheel when yarns
replaced with empty ones by Doffer,
on both spindles reach specified length.
VOLUME II B 190
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Pieces together ends of two yarns and Doffer, Spinning; Doffer, Ring Frame;
loops it on spindle of another spinning Gaiter; Shifter replaces filled bobbins with
wheel placed opposite to first. Rotates empty one on spindles of spinning frame.
wheels of both spinning wheels. Holds Brings and arranges sliver canes behind
oblong wooden device with grooves in spinning frame. Brings empty bobbins in
between two yarns. Moves wooden doffing boxes or baskets and set them in
device and second spinning wheel forward spindles of spinning frame. Watches
to get two yarns twisted and form into winding of yarns on bobbins. Lifts filled
one yarn. Removes ends of yarn loops on bobbins from spindles and collects them
spindle of first spinning wheel and twists in tray or baskets. Collects waste and
two ends together by hand. Makes hank removes them to godown. Keeps machine
of yarn by hand and keeps hank aside. sides and department clean. May help
May prepare coir fibre from retted Piecer in piecing broken ends of yarn and
coconut husk. creeling and changing ring travellers. May
clean bobbins. May perform
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: miscellaneous duties as required.
Code 7318
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Leather and Related Materials Code 7318
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
7318.4700 Leather and Related Materials
Twister
7318.4900
Knotter, Silk
Twister; Doubling Piecer; Doubling Sider;
Thrower (Textile) tends twisting machine
for twisting yarn to give it strength. Knotter, Silk tends reeling machine to
Mounts filled bobbins, cheeses or ones on draw composite silk filament from reeling
creel of machine. Places empty bobbins basin to wooden reel. Collects and mounts
on spindles of machines. Threads ends of wooden reel on machine. Draws and
yarn from filled bobbins through guides wraps ends of silk filament on reel.
and travellers and loops them on empty Switches on machine by releasing brake to
bobbins. Starts machine. Joins ends when wind filament on reel. Watches operation
yarn breaks. Removes bobbins when filled and joins ends when filament gets broken.
with twisted yarn. Is known as DOUBLER May do reeling and cooking of cocoons.
when twisting two or more strands of
yarn. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7318
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
Code 7318 Leather and Related Materials
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
Leather and Related Materials 7318.5000
Beam Gaiter
7318.4800
Doffer, Spinning/Ring Spinning Beam Gaiter; Beam Binder (Textile)
Doffer prepares loom for weaving cloth. Checks
that warp beam is properly mounted on
VOLUME II B 191
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
brackets of loom. Sets healds, reed and plan to know places where warp is to be
drop wires into position, ties warp ends to raised over weft. Inserts wooden pegs into
tail ends of cloth beam and places weft lattice as per diagram to control pattern
bobbins in shuttles. Operates loom on cloth to be woven. Carries lattice to
manually to check movements of healds, dobby loom. Fixes and adjusts heald and
shuttle and reed and makes necessary pegged lattice on loom. Repairs old,
adjustments. Hands over loom to Weaver, broken and defective lattice. May assist in
Power loom for operation. handling dobbies. May make draft,
prepare peg plan and sketch designs on
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: graph paper. May cut and lace cards.
Code 7318 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, Code 7318
Leather and Related Materials Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
7318.5100 Leather and Related Materials
Lacer, Hand
7318.5300
Lacer, Hand (Textile) laces together Reacher, Hand (Textile)
punched cards in proper sequence to be
used on jacquard; loom for weaving cloth Reacher, Hand (Textile) assists Drawer in
of different designs. Collects punched drawing ends of yarn through healds and
cards and arranges them in proper reeds. Picks up correct ends of yarn and
sequence on lacing table or stand. Cuts lays them over drawing hook to be pulled
required length of lace. Passes lace by by Drawer. Cleans healds and reeds.
hand through holes made particularly for
tying cards together to make design to be ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
used on jacquard machine for weaving Code 7318
cloth of different patterns. Carries card Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
chain to loom. May fix card chain on Leather and Related Materials
jacquard loom. May assist in handling
defective jacquard. 7318.5500
Weaver Power Loom
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7318
Weaver Power Loom operates and tends
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
power loom to weave cloth, checks that
Leather and Related Materials
shuttles are in position and supplied with
full weft bobbins, no wrap yarn is broken
7318.5200
and that set-up is ready. Starts loom.
Lattice Pegger Watches looms under his charge for
defects in weaving. Locates broken ends
Lattice Pegger; Lattice Man fixes pegs on of warp yarn, ties short length of yarn to
lattice (wooden pattern chain) used on broken end from warp beam, draws end
dobby loom for controlling fancy pattern through drop wire, healds and reeds using
weaving. Collects graph paper with reed hook, ties it to other end with a
marked draft and peg plan. Calculates weaver's knot, and starts loom again.
number of pegs of lattice required to Stops loom to remove defects caused by
make out complete design. Studies peg mispicks. Cuts and pulls out filling of weft
VOLUME II B 192
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
yarn up to point of defect, adjusts and number of knots involved in pattern by
starts loom. Replaces empty bobbin in counting graphical squares as instructed.
shuttles. Cuts cloth when cloth roll Counts and determines number and
becomes full. length of warp strands required in single
colour weaving of particular size of carpet.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Prepares cotton yarn for warp by
Code 7318 processes of bleaching, dyeing as
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, required. Wind by hand requisite number
Leather and Related Materials of cotton strands on warp beam according
7318.5800 to quality and number of stitches
required. Draws ends from warp-beam
Weaver, Handloom
and ties them to carpet beam. Collects
woollen yarn and winds it by hand into
Weaver Handloom weaves cloth from
balls. Hands woollen balls from roof near
yarn on handloom. Mounts warp beam on
loom to facilitate pulling and weaving of
loom. Sets heald frame in position. Draws
yarn. Sets and adjusts loom. Determines
ends of warp yarn from beam through
number of weavers required according to
comb and fastens them together to cloth
size of carpet. Passes and draws weft yarn
winding roll. Places full bobbins of weft
through alternate warp strands by hand to
yarn in shuttle. Operates loom by pressing
weave fringe of carpet. Ties knots of
and relieving two foot levers alternately to
woollen yarn on each strand of warp. Cuts
raise and lower heald, simultaneously
yarn after each knot at fixed length to
pulling string with jerk with one hand so
maintain required thickness. Moves heald
as to throw shuttle across warp yarn from
(part of loom mechanism) through control
side to side and by moving comb forward
string for interlacement of warp; Passes
and backward with other hand to properly
and adds two layers of thread or jute yarn
fill weft yarn. Draws broken ends of yarn
through warp sheds for holding woollen
through heald and comb and knots them.
knots or pile; presses knots and weft filling
Replaces empty bobbins in shuttles.
by hand work to ensure even stiffness.
Removes cloth from roll when required
Trims off extra fibre at intervals using
length has been woven. May size and dye
hand shears.
yarn, wind yarn on bobbins or beam and
draw ends of yarn from warp beam
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
through healds preparatory to weaving.
Code 7318
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Leather and Related Materials
Code 7318
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
7318.6000
Leather and Related Materials
Carpet Clipper, Hand
7318.5900
Carpet Clipper, Hand; Carpet Trimmer,
Carpet Weaver, Hand Knitting
Hand clips extra fibres from upper side of
carpet to give it smooth finish. Spreads
Carpet Weaver, Hand Knotting weaves
carpet on even surface and rubs and
woollen or cotton carpets and druggets on
scraps surface with scraper or metal comb
handloom. Studies design and colour
to align and raise fibres. Clips excess fibres
combination from chart. Determines
VOLUME II B 193
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
with and shears. May mend and repair ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
carpets. Code 7318
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Leather and Related Materials
Code 7318
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, 7318.6300
Leather and Related Materials Coir Weaver (Matting)
Coir Weaver (Matting) weaves coir
7318.6100
matting on handloom. Mounts wrap beam
Carpet Embosser on loom. Sets heald frame in position.
Draws ends of warp yarn from beam
Carpet Embosser; Carpet Carver trims through healds and reeds (beater) and
edges of floral designs or patterns on fasten ends to mat winding roll. Places
carpet to give raised appearance. Spreads quill of required colour into shuttle.
carpet on even surface. On floral design Presses and relieves levers alternately to
cuts wool with hand scissors to give raised raise and lower heald according to
appearance to design. Chalks around or weaving design, operates shuttle from
stencils outline of designs on carpet and end to end to weave matting. Moves
creates embossed effect by clipping wool beater forward and backwards forcibly by
either wholly under or wholly outside hands to fill weft yarn. Passes wooden rod
design. May prepare designs. between weft and beater and moves
beater forward and backward again to fill
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: weft. Removes rod and repeats operation
Code 7318 using quills of specified colour according
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, to pattern of matting required. Draws
Leather and Related Materials broken ends of yarn through heald and
reed and knots them. Cuts fibres
7318.6200 projecting upwards with shears according
to thickness of mat required. Rolls matting
Carpet Repairer
on mat winding roll by pressing lever.
Removes matting from roll when required
Carpet Repairer repairs and gives final
length is woven. May do bleaching and
finish to carpets and rugs. Stretches
dyeing of coir.
carpet on flat surface. Rubs red or
coloured chalk on separate string. Sets it
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
straight against edge of stretched carpet.
Code 7318
Strikes coloured string over edge of carpet
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
to mark straight line. Cuts marked edges,
Leather and Related Materials
using knife, to bring carpet to required
measurement. Binds and trims cut edges
7318.6400
using needle and thread. Checks front and
back of carpet for gaps in knots and badly Net Maker, Hand
woven parts, and corrects any defects by
stitching loose knots and repairing cuts Net Maker, Hand makes nets and meshes
and damaged portions. May apply by weaving twine and thread with netting
stiffening solution to back of loosely needle or shuttle. Selects design of netting
woven carpet. and kind of twine or thread required.
VOLUME II B 194
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Plaits (interweaves) and knots twine or Measures sample or determines size of
thread with netting needle or shuttle to article to be knitted and knits it by making
prepare selected patterns. Waxes twine loops and picks with knitting needles,
while weaving to smoothen and according to specified or selected pattern.
strengthen it. Trims excess twine or Knits article part by part and finishes it by
thread. sewing them together and pressing. May
use single flexible wire needle or more
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: than two needles for knitting specific
Code 7318 items according to pattern of knitting
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles, desired. May knit articles with cotton or
Leather and Related Materials silk yarns.
7318.6500 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Crochet Worker, Hand Code 7318
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
Leather and Related Materials
Crochet Worker Hand; Crocheter, Hand;
Lace Maker, Hand knits lace, trimmings,
7318.6700
etc. with hand crocheting hook or needle.
Selects pattern of lace or trimmings to be Braid Maker, Hand
prepared and studies it for size and
number of stitches to be made. Selects Braid Maker, Hand makes braid by hand.
suitable colour and quality of thread and Interlaces and entwines strands of wool,
required type of crocheting needle. Rolls silk, linen or thread to make ribbon-like or
thread into balls for convenience of cord-like fabrics for binding or for
knitting. Threads hand crocheting needle ornamental purposes.
and moves it around thread for making
loops and knots to knit desired pattern. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Checks work while knitting to ensure Code 7318
conformity with pattern and smoothens Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
out knitted article on finish. May operate Leather and Related Materials
crocheting machine.
7318.9900
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
Code 7318
Leather and Related Materials,
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
Others
Leather and Related Materials
Weavers, Knitters, and Related Workers,
7318.6600
Other include all other workers engaged
Knitter, Hand
in knitting articles by hand or machine,
not elsewhere classified.
Knitter, Hand knits sweaters, dresses,
socks and other articles by hand with
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
woollen yarn according to specified
Code 7318
pattern. Decides shade, number and type
Title Handicraft Workers in Textiles,
of woollen yarn to be used and selects
Leather and Related Materials
pair of knitting needles accordingly.
VOLUME II B 195
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Family 7319 lines. Transfers composed matter to
Handicrafts Workers, Not galley. Follows manuscript rigidly but
breaks up words at end of a line when
Elsewhere Classified
necessary. Revises composed matter
according to corrections made in proof.
This family covers handicraft workers who
May create matter by positioning blocks
perform traditional handicrafts not
and arranging type for effective display.
classified elsewhere. For instance, the
May also distribute type into case after
family includes traditional handicraft
matter is printed.
workers in non-precious metals and stone.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7321
Group 732
Title Pre-press Technicians
Printing Trades Workers
7321.0200
Printing Trades workers compose and set Impositor
type prior to printing, set up and operate
printing presses, bind and finish printed
Impositor; Imposer removes composed
products, and prepare stencils and
matter from galley and arranges it on
operate screen printing equipment
imposing stone in prescribed pattern so
that, when printed, pages can be
Occupations in this Group are classified
conveniently arranged in number series.
into the following Families:
(Pattern differ according to number of
pages on each printing sheet). Fixes
7321 Pre-press Technicians
spacing of margin using wooden chips,
7322 Printers
leads and hammer and locks matter in
7323 Print Finishing and Binding chase.
Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Family 7321 Code 7321
Pre-press Technicians Title Pre-press Technicians
7321.0300
Pre-press Technicians proof, format, set
and compose text and graphics into a Distributor (Letter Press)
form suitable for use in various printing
processes and representation in other Distributor (Letter Press) distributes types
visual media. and other material utilised in composing
to their respective cases and racks in store
room. Unlocks chase, separates spacing
7321.0100
material, types and blocks, if any, and
Compositor, Hand
keeps them in respective cases and racks;
packs and labels composed material in
Compositor, Hand, sets type by hand for
paper for further use if required;
printing. Picks up type from case and
separates types and spacing material
assembles them into words and lines in
surplus to requirements, and keeps them
composing stick. Arranges even spacing of
VOLUME II B 196
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
aside for melting. May do composing and Stereo Matrix Moulder; Matrix Maker
imposing work. operates hydraulic or hand press to obtain
print impressions on flong (specially
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: prepared thick sheet of paper) for casting
Code 7321 printing plates used in rotary printing.
Title Pre-press Technicians Damps flong, places it on forme, spreads
chase or page rubber sheet or extra
7321.0400 sheets of thick paper on flong for padding
to protect flong from damage on
Composing Room Operatives
application of pressure from press head;
sets machine and adjusts press head for
Composing Room Operatives perform
correct pressure to be applied on flong;
variety of routine and low skilled tasks,
starts machine and lowers press head on
such as pulling galley proof or cylinder
assembly to impress type into flong; stops
proof, stacking formes in racks or carrying
machine and releases pressure from
them from racks for printing, washing
matrix and carefully strips matrix from
composed matter, etc., and be known as:
chase; checks surface of matrix for any
Forme Carrier carries formes from
unevenness in imprint and smoothens
composing room to Printing-Machine
surface with blunt wooden blade and
Man, cleans type-heads in formes with
trims edges of matrix with scissors; turns
water and wire brush to remove ink and
mould face down and fills in hollows on
dust; carries formes to distributors. Proof
back of mould with pieces of heavy paper
Pressman (Galley/Forme) pulls proof for
or felt to prevent it bending during casting
proof reading in galley forme in initial
process; applies French chalk powder over
stages of printing, or when type-formes
entire surface of matrix and cleans it with
have been imposed and locked in chase.
fine hand brush. Delivers prepared matrix
Galley Proof Man if operates flat bed
to Stereo Type Caster for casting rotary
printing machine to obtain impression on
printing plates with it. Cleans and oils
paper from types heads in galley; places
machine. May dress printing plate
galley with composed type on bed of
(metallic plate cast by pouring molten
machine; applies printing ink with ink
metal over matrix in casting machine) on
roller manually; places sheet of paper on
routing and cutting machine. May cast
type and manually operates machine to
printing plate.
press paper on to type; removes printed
paper and checks clarity of impression.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
May take galley proof to Proof Reader.
Code 7321
Oils and cleans machine.
Title Pre-press Technicians
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7321.0600
Code 7321
Stereotype Caster
Title Pre-press
Technicians
Stereotype Caster; Rotary Caster prepares
7321.0500 plates for rotary or flat-bed printing by
operating casting machine. Dries matrix
Stereo Matrix Moulder
on roaster and places it in correct position
in casting box. Checks supply of metal at
VOLUME II B 197
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
correct temperature for casting and 7321.0800
operates machines to pump molten metal Lithographic Artist
from crucible against matrix. Removes
plates after cooling, for finishing. Cleans
Lithographic Artist exposes sensitized
and oils machine.
metal plate to positive or negative film,
using vacuum frame, to produce offset
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
lithographic printing plates. Increases or
Code 7321 reduces size of photographic dots by
Title Pre-press Technicians chemical or photomechanical methods on
halftone negatives or positives to be used
7321.0700 in preparation of lithographic printing
Electrotyper plates. Punches holes in light-sensitive
plate with register punch and insert
Electrotyper performs all or several tasks register pins in holes to prepare plate for
in making printing plates from set-up type contact with positive or negative film.
by electro-plating process, using hand Places plate on bed of vacuum frame and
tools, electro-plating equipment and inserts positives or negatives on register
metal casting, trimming and forming pins to align positives or negatives with
machines. Places set up type on bed of each other. Places masking paper on areas
hydraulic press. Lays wax-coated sheet of of plate not covered by positives or
metal or sheet of plastic or lead on type negatives to prevent exposure of those
and presses it to make mould. Removes areas. Examines film on light table to
mould from press and trims its edges. determine specified colour and colour
Sprays or coats mould with electro- balance, using magnifying glass or
conductive substances and places it in densitometer. Compares proof print of
electrolytic bath until shell of desired colour separation negative or positive
thickness has formed on mould. Removes with customer’s original sample or copy
shell from mould by rinsing it in hot water and standard colour chart to determine
and fills back of shell with molten lead to accuracy of reproduction. Identifies and
form plate, using pouring lead or casting marks colour discrepancies on print and
machine. Examines plate with magnifier to film. Prepares dyes or other chemical
detect imperfect formation of halftone solutions according to standard formulas
dots, lines and types and rectifies them and applies solution to produce colour
using engraver's hand tools. Shaves, trims, effect by chemical method. Blocks out or
smoothens and bends plate using hand modifies colour shades of film, using
tools and machines as required, in template, brushes, and opaque. Places
readiness for printing. May print proof masks over separation negatives or
from plate and make new plate if positives and exposes film for specified
necessary. May be designated according time, using contact frame and automatic
to tasks performed such as ELECTROTYPE film processors to reduce size of
CASTER, ELECTROTYPE MOULDER, etc. photographic dots to increase or reduce
colour. Applies opaque to block out
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: blemishes and pinholes.
Code 7321
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Pre-press Technicians
Code 321
VOLUME II B 198
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Pre-press Technicians the Circuit Imaging Operator imprints the
circuit design layout on the laminated
7321.0801 printed circuit board (PCB) with ultraviolet
Circuit Imaging Operator (UV) light exposure. The individual at work
places the circuit design layout printed on
a ‘positive’ translucent film on the
Circuit Imaging Operator imprints the
laminated and photo-sensitive PCB panel
requisite circuit with the help of UV rays
and exposes it to UV light, thereby curing
through machine on to the laminated
the photo-resist under the clear portions
board. A Circuit Imaging Operator
of the film in order to get the circuit
captures the requisite circuit on the
printed onto the panel.
laminated panel. A positive UV translucent
film is placed on the photo sensitised
Qualification Pack Details:
board. The film is required to be opaque
in regions where the circuit trace is QP NOS Reference ELE/Q2201
necessary and is clear elsewhere. On QP NOS Name Circuit Imaging
exposure to UV, the photo resist under Operator-Photo
the clear portions of the film get cured Imaging
without affecting the area under opaque NSQF Level 4
portions of the film. A Circuit Imaging
Operator captures the requisite circuit on ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
the laminated panel. A positive UV Code 7321
translucent film is placed on the photo Title Pre-press Technicians
sensitised board. The film is required to
be opaque in regions where the circuit 7321.0900
trace is necessary and is clear elsewhere. Retoucher, Lithographic
On exposure to UV, the photo resist under
the clear portions of the film get cured
Retoucher, Lithographic; Photoengraving
without affecting the area under opaque
Finisher; Process Artist-Lithographic-
portions of the film.
Colour-Artist Retoucher; Tone Artist
refines or corrects imperfections in design
Qualification Pack Details:
on lithographic printing plates by drawing
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q2101 on them with scribbling tools, crayons,
QP NOS Name Circuit Imaging pen and ink to make them fit for printing.
Operator Intensifies or reduces unsatisfactory tone
NSQF Level 4 values, blanks out or changes shades of
colours of details to make them less
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: prominent, adds missing details, etc.
Code 7321
Title Pre-press Technicians ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7321
7321.0802 Title Pre-press Technicians
Circuit Imaging Operator-Photo
Imaging 7321.1000
Circuit Imaging Operator-Photo Imaging is
also known as ‘Photo Imaging Operator’,
VOLUME II B 199
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Mounter/Mounting Machine dots for half-tone printing and uses
Operator/CNC Mounting Machine different colour filters for preparing
separate colour-wise plates for printing.
Operator
May also prepare photo-sensitive glass
plate for use in camera.
Mounter fixes etched type or image plate
on wooden block for printing. Cuts plate
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to size, levels its sides, drills holes on
Code 7321
bevelled portions and mounts plate on
Title Pre-press Technicians
wooden block by nailing.
7321.1300
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Microstat Cameraman
Code 7321
Title Pre-press Technicians
Microstat Cameraman; Microfilm
7321.1100 Cameraman; Microstat Camera Operator
reproduces documents, maps, charts, etc.,
Router
photographically on special type of
camera known as Microstat. Places copy
Router reduces level of non-type or image
on copy board or copying frame, loads
portions of mounted plate to make it non-
filmstrip in camera, focuses camera,
printable. Clamps block on bed of routing
adjusts light and exposes film which is
machine, fixes needle to holder, adjusts its
automatically processed. May also enlarge
height, operates machine and regulates
with special enlarging device fitted to this
movement of needle which reduces level
camera.
of portions of plate not required for
printing.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 321
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Pre-press Technicians
Code 7321
Title Pre-press Technicians 7321.1400
Photostat Camera
7321.1200
Operator/Photocopier Operator
Cameraman, Photomechanical
Photostat Camera Operator; Photostat
Cameraman, Photomechanical; Machine Operator produces copy of
Lithographic Cameraman; drawings, manuscripts and other
Photolithographer photographs documents directly on prepared paper by
illustrations or type set material to obtain means of a Photostat camera. Mounts
line, half tone, continuous tone and colour document to be copied in glass frame and
negatives for use in printing. Places arranges it under camera lens, places roll
illustrations or types material on copy of photographic paper in the camera,
board of copying frame. Adjusts lights and adjusts distance, focus, time and lights
camera, focuses with help of ground-glass and takes photographs. Cuts and rolls out
focusing screen, loads plate in dark room, exposed section of paper into developer
mounts it on camera and exposes it. Uses which automatically develops the print.
screen to break up shadings of copy into
VOLUME II B 200
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Arranges for its drying either in a cabinet acid vat with aid of helpers and hoist,
or between blotting pads. agitates acid solution with compressed air
and starts machine to start roller in
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: solution to get it etched by acid reaction.
Code 7321 Applies acid resisting material on photo-
Title Pre-press Technicians printed design on plate, places it in
etching machine and starts machine to
7321.1500 spray acid as uncoloured portion of plate
to get it etched by acid reaction for
Transferor, Photomechanical
etching photo-engraved flat bodies and
metal plates. Checks depth of etching
Transferor, Photo Mechanical;
periodically by measuring with depth
Photoengraving Printer; Proof-plate
gauge, touch and magnifying glass and
Maker; Helio Operator; Vandyke Printer
processes roller through series of acid
transfers impression from photograph
baths or regulates period of acid spray as
negatives to metal plates for subsequent
necessary to etch photo-engraved roller
processing or for direct use in lithographic
or plate to required depth, watches and
printing. Measures negative for cutting
dries treated plate or roller, applies acid
plates (zinc or copper) to size, sensitizes
resistant powder or charcoal into etched
plate by pouring solutions, places plate
cavities and repeats etching process if
and negative in contact frame, exposes
necessary. Cleans off charcoal and acid
plate to light, develops it with photo-
resistant coating by washing and brushing
developing chemicals and dries it.
with alkali solution and water. May touch
up defective areas by hand etching.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7321
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Pre-press Technicians
Code 7321
Title Pre-press Technicians
7321.1600
Etcher Photo Engraving
7321.1700
Barman, Lino Machine
Etcher, Photo Engraving Photo Engraver;
Etcher Litho-Printing etches designs on
Barman, Lino-Machine cleans space band,
surface of photographically printed or
mould surface and metal pot of lino-
pantographically engraved printing rollers
typesetting machine and removes types
and plates, employing knowledge of
which are stuck when bar of machine gets
colours, fabrics and etching and printing
jammed. Unlocks mould surface from
techniques. Studies design sheet and
machine and cleans it with wire brush
determines etching requirements based
applying graphite with rag to remove
on colours in design, type, weight of fabric
metallic particles and dust to prevent
and printing sequence. Lifts roller into
clogging during operation; cleans metal
brackets of rinsing vat with aid of helper
pot to remove traces of metal particles
and tapes ends of roller with masking tape
from inside surface; removes matrices
to limit etching to specified width, cleans
which cause obstruction to movement of
roller or plate preparatory to etching,
distribution bar on machine for removing
using sponge, cleaning chemicals and
defects. Oils various parts of machine.
water. Transfers roller from rinsing vat to
VOLUME II B 201
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
May change measurement lines in mould 7322.0200
of machine, if required, and supply lead Lino Operator
bricks to metal pot.
Lino Operator; Lino-typesetting Machine
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Operator; Intertype Machine Operator;
Code 7321 Composing Machine Operator lino type
Title Pre-press Technicians operates key-board (similar to that of
typewriter) of lino-type setting or inter-
7321.9900 type setting machine, to cast lines of type
Pre-Press Technicians, Others called slugs. Adjusts machine according to
size of type and length of line to be
formed. Presses keys of keyboard to
Pre-Press Technicians, Others include
assemble matrices to form words and
workers who engrave lithographic stones
lines following manuscript rigidly. Breaks
and printing plates, rollers, dies and blocks
up words if necessary at end of each line.
by various processes not elsewhere
Presses button at end of each composed
classified.
line to enable machine to cast whole line
of type automatically. Casts new lines
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
removing errors pointed out by Proof
Code 7321
Reader. Ensures that Barman cleans
Title Pre-press Technicians
machine and space band, distributes
matrices into magazine of machine and
Family 7322
keeps metal pot full.
Printers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Printers set up and operate digital, Code 7322
letterpress, lithographic, flexographic, Title Printers
gravure, newspaper and other printing
presses. 7322.0300
Mono Operator
7322.0100
Job Printer Mono Operator; Monotype Key-Board
Operator; Composing Machine Operator,
Monotype which makes perforations on
Job Printer composes matter by hand and
spool of paper used for casting types of
prints it on manually operated machine.
printing. Sets machine to ensure correct
Sets type by hand, takes and corrects
spacing and adjusts line-length indicator.
proof, imposes matter in galley and prints
Mounts spool of paper on machine and
by manually operated printing machine,
operates key-board following manuscript
thus performing duties of Hand
at end of each line. Tears off perforated
Compositor, Proof Reader, Impositor,
strip from spool when all matter of
Handpress Man, Handprinting Machine
manuscript has been transferred on it.
Man.
Qualification Pack Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference
Code 7322
QP NOS Name
Title Printers
VOLUME II B 202
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
NSQF Level temperature of molten lead to ensure
proper moulding; starts machine, opens
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: water circulation system of machine to
Code 7322 cool dies during casting operation and
Title Printers observes machine pumping molten lead
7322.0400 into die mould, casting types and
delivering caste types along table channel;
Mono Caster
checks whether caste type conforms to
specifications; removes slag from molten
Mono Caster; Caster Operator; Monotype
lead chamber periodically to keep molten
Caster tends automatic machine that casts
liquid free from impurities; cleans and oils
and composes types. Places on machine
machine. May clean and dress caste types.
spool of paper perforated by Mono
May caste brass or other metal types.
Operator and attaches it to winding roll.
Sets composing stick to required length,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
inserts matrix case of required size of type
Code 7322
and locks galley on bed of machine. Starts
Title Printers
machine. Ensures that metal pot is
7322.0600
adequately supplied with metal and
maintains proper temperature of molten Maker-up, Photo Type Setting
metal. Stops machine when galley is full or
casting is completed. Removes galley from Maker-up, Photo-Type-Setting arranges
machine for taking proof. May clean and photo-composed type film and fixes it on
oil machine. paper (positive) in readiness for
reproduction on printing plates. Examines
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: lay-out of copy. Marks positive to guide in
Code 7322 arranging type and draws lines on
Title Printers positions for decoration purposes and
tabular matter. Waxes proof-sheets of
7322.0500 photo-composition and cuts out letters
and lines as required. Places cut-out
Type Caster
pieces in position on paper using
measuring instruments for guidance.
Type Caster operates type-casting
Presses sheet of tissue paper over photo-
machine for casting types for printing.
composition to ensure that wax holds
Selects and fits appropriate metal mould
pieces in position. Checks arrangement of
and matrix to machine, depending on size
composition and makes necessary
and nature of types to be cast; sets
alterations. Passes on completed positive
machine to required performance, aligns
for printing reproduction.
matrix and mould using gauzes, screws
etc., and closes die case bridge of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine; cleans lead chamber and nozzle
Code 7322
of plunger of lead chamber with metal
Title Printers
rod; fills lead chamber with lead blocks for
melting; switches on electrical mechanism
7322.0700
in machine or lights coal in fire-box below
Photo Type Setting Machine
lead chamber to heat metal pot to melt
lead blocks. Checks and maintains correct Operator
VOLUME II B 203
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
types into founts (different types of
Photo Type-Setting Machine Operator letters, figures, etc.) for packing.
operates key-board of machine which
reproduces letters on film or sensitized ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
paper for reproduction in printing. Places Code 7322
unexposed film or sensitized paper in Title Printers
photographic element of machine.
Examines lay-out copy for typographical 7322.0900
indications, such as spacing, typefaces and
Roller Maker, Paper Printing
length of lines. Starts machine and sets its
dial according to typographical
Roller Maker, Paper Printing casts rollers
instructions on layout copy. Reads copy
from roller composition (product of glue
and depresses keys of keyboard to
and glycerine) for use in printing. Cuts
reproduce required letters on film or
composition into small pieces and melts
sensitized paper. Manipulates machine
them in glue-pot; cleans and oils inside
controls as necessary to change type size
surface of cylindrical mould; winds jute
and spacing, adjust camera light and
cord round steel stalk and places it inside
eliminate incorrect lines. Removes
mould; melts composition in electric
container with exposed film or sensitized
furnace controlling heat to prevent
paper on completion of operation and
molten composition from over burning;
sends it to developing room.
fixes mould in metallic stand, pours
molten solution in mould to required level
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and allows it to set; removes roller from
Code 7322
mould, trims and polishes surface. May do
Title Printers
repair work. May evolve own
composition.
7322.0800
Type Dresser ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7322
Type Dresser; Type Cutter dresses cast Title Printers
types by cutting and grinding to make
them uniform for use in composing. 7322.1000
Arranges cast type on grooved stick,
Braille-Duplicating-Machine
transfers and secures them to metal
Operator (Printing and Publishing)
dressing rod by screw. Places metal rod in
Braille-Duplicating-Machine Operator
position on table and files side surfaces of
tends equipment to reproduce Braille-
types to remove unevenness; cuts, groove
embossed pages, using one of following
on one side of type using metal planer to
methods: (1) Places master page on
chip off bottom portion to make them
screen bed. Places roll of treated paper on
uniform in height; checks dressed types
stand. Threads paper through equipment
for burr and sharp edges and removes
and locks paper in clamping frame. Pulls
them by grinding and polishing with
heat unit over clamping frame. Depresses
emery paper to obtain smooth surface;
pedal or handle to lower clamping frame
transfers dressed type back to wooden
onto screen bed and to create vacuum
stick for sorting and packing. May sort
that forms braille impressions. Pushes
heat unit from bed. Releases pedal or
VOLUME II B 204
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
handle to raise clamping frame, and 7322.1200
releases catch on frame to draw Silk Screen Printer
reproduced copy through equipment.
Repeats process to make required number
Silk Screen Printer prints on paper, metal
of copies. Cuts copies apart, using scissors.
textile and other materials by means of
Writes identifying information, such as
silk-screen process. Mounts stencil of
page number or title, on each copy. (2)
matter to be printed on silk screen.
Positions master page on screen bed.
Stretches and fits silk screen on printing
Places sheet of heat-sensitive plastic
frame. Bolts printing frame to hinged
paper over page and lowers clamping
outer frame on printing table. Places
frame to lock page into position on bed.
paper or other material to be printed
Pulls heat unit over clamping frame to
accurately in position and lowers screen
activate vacuum pump trip-lever. Holds
on to it. Draws squeegee dipped in paint
heat unit over frame to form braille
across screen to transfer design to object.
impressions. Pushes heat unit from bed to
Lifts screen, removes printed material and
release vacuum. Raises frame to release
repeats process to obtain required
individual copy. Repeats process to make
number of prints. Cleans screen with
required number of copies.
solvent at end of run or when colour of
print is to be changed. May use different
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
screens for each colour to be reproduced.
Code 7322
Title Printers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7322
7322.1100
Title Printers
Stencil Cutter, Silk Screen Printing
7322.1300
Stencil Cutter, Silk Screen Printing cuts Printing Jobber
stencils by hand, according to design, for
use in silk-screen printing. Superimposes
Printing Jobber; Printing Machine Man;
shellacked transparent paper on design of
Printer (Textile) prints patterns of various
matter, to be reproduced and cuts with
designs and colours of cloth by operating
knife outline of design in shellac without
printing machine. Checks condition of
cutting paper. Irons paper on silk screen
belts, gears, doctor blade, lapping of drum
to transfer shellac stencil to it. Cuts
or cylinder etc. Sets engraved rollers. Runs
different stencils for each colour to be
test piece of cloth through machine and
reproduced. May draw design directly on
compares it with sample. Makes
screen and fill in surfaces around design
necessary adjustments to rollers and
with glue lacquer or paper. May operate
doctor blade. Regulates pressure and
silk-screen printing equipment. May cut
speed. Grinds and sharpens doctor blade
stencils for use in making computer circuit
when necessary. Supervises work of
plug boards and be designated as SILK
Frontman and Printing Machine
SCREEN LAY OUT DRAUGHTSMAN.
Operatives. Ensures proper colour mixing,
colour matching, quality of printing
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
production and upkeep of machine, etc.
Code 7322
Title Printers
VOLUME II B 205
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: equipment. Examines and inspects printed
Code 7322 material for clarity of print and specified
Title Printers colour. Mixes powdered ink pigments,
using matching book and measuring and
7322.1400 mixing tools. Reviews layout and
customer order to determine size and
Colour Maker (Textile Product)
style of type. Measures density levels of
colours or colour guides on proofs, using
Colour Maker (Textile Product) operates
densitometer, and compares readings to
machines to mix or grind daub, printing
set standards. Prints paper or film copies
ink colour, and colour pigments, for
of completed material from computer.
artificial leather: Calculates batch size
Scans artwork, using optical scanner,
according to roll yardage to be coated.
which changes image into computer-
Weighs and measures, according to
readable form. Enters, positions, and
formula, components, such as ball mill
alters size of text, using computer, to
mix, colour pigments, and oils to attain
prepare and arrange pages to produce
colours and specified consistency. Moves
printed materials.
components to agitator or ball mill mixers
and roll grinders for processing, using
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
hand truck. Dumps ingredients into and
Code 7322
starts machines that grind and mix them.
Title Printers
Collects colour sample and compares it
with colour standard. Adds ingredients,
7322.1600
such as white, clear, or coloured
pigments, or thinner to correct colour Frontman
discrepancies. Prepares new colour
batches when drum content in inventory Frontman; Assistant Printer; Assistant
storage is low. Lifts and moves drums, Printing Machine man (Textile) assists
using portable air-operated hydraulic printer in printing patterns of various
hoist. designs and colours of cloth. Checks
operational efficiency of printing machine,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: adjusting various parts if necessary, and
Code 7322 reports defects to Printer. Prepares
Title Printers colours to correct consistency by mixing
7322.1500 ingredients in suitable vessel, and test
checks shade of colour; fills front colour
Precision Printing Worker
tray with prepared colour paste; fits and
locks printing roller, engraved with
Precision Printing Worker performs
design/pattern in position on machine;
variety of precision printing activities,
supervises rolling of cloth into machine
such as duplication of microfilm and
ensuring smooth run through various
reproduction of graphic arts materials.
rollers. Starts and stops machine as
Operates automatic processor to develop
directed by Printer. Watches printed cloth
photographs, plates, or base material
coming out from engraved rollers for
used in single or multicolour proofs. Sets
defects in print or shade. May carry out
up and operates bindery equipment to
routine repairs on printing machine.
cut, assemble, staple, or bind materials.
Maintains printing machinery and
VOLUME II B 206
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 7322.1800
Code 7322 Machine Man , Hand Printing
Title Printers
Machine Man, Hand Printing operates
7322.1700 cylinder or platen hand press for printing.
Pressman (Flat-Bed, Letter Press) Fixes imposed type on bed of printing
machine and levels them. Checks up
Pressman (Flat-Bed Letter Press); supply of ink in duct, adjusts roller parts,
Pressman; Hand Fed sets and operates changes packing (paper lining) and runs
Flat-bed letter press (printing machine in machine for printing. Ensures uniformity
which separate sheets of paper are of inking and impression.
pressed by means of cylinder or plate
(platen) on inked rollers and oils machine; ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
fills ink fountain and regulates flow of ink Code 7322
on inking rollers; locks type in position on Title Printers
bed of press by means of wedges; places
wooden block over type and taps it with 7322.1900
mallet to level printing surface; packs Machine Man, Automatic Printing
surface of cylinder, or platen with tissue
paper; starts press and pulls proof sheets;
Machine Man, Automatic Printing
examines proof sheets to ensure legibility
operates cylinder or platen automatic
and uniformity of printing, adjusts press
printing machine. Fixes imposed type on
controls, inking fountains, and automatic
bed of machine. Adjusts roller, flow of ink,
feeders, and repacks cylinder or plate with
automatic feeder and speed of machine,
overlay to equalize off-level areas as
changes packing of platen, places paper
required; pulls out several proof sheets
on automatic feeding board and runs
and makes necessary adjustments until
machine for printing. Ensures uniformity
evenly printed proof is obtained; sets and
of inking and impression. May clean and
adjusts paper guides and feeding
oil machine.
mechanism; starts press and ensures that
printing proceeds correctly; stops press
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
when printing is completed. May mix inks
Code 7322
to match colours, feed paper sheets into
Title Printers
machine by hand, or direct helpers to do
so, prepare pages of type. May also do
7322.2000
minor repairs. Is designated as TREADLE
Machine Man, Rotary Printing
MAN OR PLATEN MACHINE PRESSMAN if
works on Hand-fed or automatic platen
machine, and CYLINDER PRINTING Machine Man, Rotary Printing; Machine
MACHINE MAN if works on Hand-fed or Minder, Rotary Printing; Rotary Operator,
automatic cylinder printing machine. Printing sets and operates rotary printing
machine that prints on continuous roll of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: paper by means of stereotype plates
locked in a revolving cylinder. Cleans
Code 7322
inking rollers and oils machine; fills ink
Title Printers
fountains and regulates flow of ink on
inking rollers; locks printing plates in
VOLUME II B 207
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
position on cylinders. Supervises loading 7322.2200
of paper rolls on machine; threads paper Machine Man, Direct Lithographic
through machine guides and rollers;
Printing
adjusts rollers and paper folding and
cutting mechanism; makes trial run;
Machine Man, Direct Lithographic
checks legibility and uniformity of
Printing; Litho Printer operates direct litho
printing, regulates speed and makes
press in which impression is transferred
further adjustments as necessary, restarts
directly from plate or stone to paper.
press and runs it to full speed; checks
Washes plate with water and positions it
printed copies at regular intervals and
on bed of machine. Places paper for
ensures that printing, folding and cutting
printing on feeding board. Adjusts rollers
proceed correctly; re-threads paper if web
and dampers. Runs machine for printing.
breaks; stops press when required
Ensures uniformity of inking and
number of copies have been printed, and
impression.
removes plates. Keeps record of
production. May file and grind cutting
7322.2300
blades. May load supply rolls of paper in
Pressman, Roto Gravure
press at beginning and during run. May do
minor repairs.
Pressman, Roto Gravure sets and operates
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: rotary-type press to print illustrative and
other subject matter on continuous roll of
Code 7322
paper from photo-engraved plates or
Title Printers
cylinders upon which printing matter is
etched below surface. Cleans inking rollers
7322.2100
and oils machine. Installs engraved copper
Machine Man, Offset Printing
printing cylinder in press, using hand
tools. Fills ink fountains and regulates flow
Machine Man , Offset Printing; Offset
of ink. Threads paper through machine
Printer operates offset printing press in
guides and rollers and adjusts rollers and
which impression from plate is first
paper folding and cutting mechanism. Sets
received on rubber blanket and then
focus of electronic scanners on guide line
transferred to paper. Washes plate with
of paper (for multi-colour printing) to
chemical solutions to render non-image
automatically control colour registration.
portions ink-repellent and to ensure clear
Sets and adjusts scraper blade to remove
impression. Clamps plates firmly on
excess of ink from surface of plate or
cylinder, places paper roll on automatic
cylinder. Makes trial run, checks legibility
feeding stand and fills ink in fountain in
and uniformity of printing on paper and
machine. Runs machine for printing.
further adjustments, if necessary. Restarts
Regulates speed of machine and ensures
machine, raises it to full speed. Inspects
uniformity of inking and impression.
printed copies at regular intervals and
Supervises work of Inkers. Cleans and oils
adjusts press as required to produce
machine.
printed matter to specifications. Directs
workers in feeding and unloading press,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
replenishing ink supply in fountains,
Code 7322 cleaning equipment and other press
Title Printers operations. Stops press when required
VOLUME II B 208
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
number of copies have been printed and Print finishing and binding workers bind
removes plates or cylinders from machine. books and other publications, and finish
Maintains prescribed records of
printed products by hand or machine.
production. May file and grind scraping
and cutting blades. 7323.0100
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Book Binder
Code 7322
Title Printers
Book Binder assembles printed or written
pages in the form of books, magazines,
7322.9900
ledgers, etc. Performs all or any of
Printers, Others operations connected with book binding
such as reeling, perforating, cutting,
Printing Press Operatives perform variety stitching, fixing covers, fixing leather or
of routine and low skilled tasks such as calico back and corners, embossing letters
applying ink on type set in hand press, on covers, gold finishing, etc.
cleaning and oiling printing machines,
feeding paper, mounting paper reels and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
clamping printing plates on rotary Code 7323
machines etc., and be known as: Inkman If Title Print Finishing and Binding
fills ink trough on printing machine with Workers
liquid ink and applies ink manually with
roller on type set in hand press. Machine 7323.0200
Attendant If mounts paper reels in
Map and Chart Mounter
position and passes paper through rollers
to proper position for printing, clamps
Map-and-Chart Mounter glues muslin
printing plates on rotary machines. Feeder
backing or back board to paper maps and
Man If feeds paper, piled up on feeding
charts for reinforcement. Spreads muslin
platform, into machine for printing and
on table and cuts it to specified
checks flow of paper sheets into machine
dimensions, using scissors; applies glue to
and regulates speed of feeding.
back of maps and charts with brush or by
Deliveryman If takes delivery of printed
inserting them between rollers of gluing
sheets of paper on printing machine;
machine; places glued side of sheet on
checks quality of printing and shows
muslin strip or pre-cut back board and
periodically samples of printing to
smoothens surface with stiff brush and
Machine Man for necessary adjustment of
flat piece of bone; glues paper mounting
machine to ensure quality of impression.
strip to top edge and oil cloth, reinforcing
strip to bottom edge of roll type maps and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
charts and hangs them on drying rack;
Code 7322
applies gelatine sizing and varnishing
Title Printers
material on surface of map for
preservation and good finish; folds or
Family 7323
gathers maps to suitable sizes for easy
Print Finishing and Binding Workers and convenient handling. May fix wooden
rollers for roll type maps and charts. May
do segment map mounting.
VOLUME II B 209
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Print Finishing and Binding
Code 7323 Workers
Title Print Finishing and Binding
Workers 7323.0500
Book Binding Operatives
7323.0300
Book Mender Book Binding Operatives perform variety
of routine and low-skilled tasks connected
Book Mender; Book Repairer mends and with book binding, such as, cutting paper
repairs damaged and worn books, to specified size, ruling blank sheets,
manuscripts, and other records to put applying gum, etc.
them in condition for re-use or resale.
Examines damaged books, manuscripts ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and records and assesses extent of Code 7323
damage; numbers pages and erases Title Print Finishing and Binding
disfigurations; cuts covers loose from Workers
body and body stitches with knife; cuts or
tears carefully damaged pages or linings;
7323.9900
repairs damaged pages with transparent
Book Binders and Related Workers,
tapes; resews body firmly; pastes linings
Other
in place, reinforcing as necessary with
cloth or paper; trims edges of pages with
knife or mechanical cutter; replaces Bookbinders and Related Workers, Other
repaired cover or new ones to body; include workers who bind covers to books
clamps book in press for specified time to and perform book-finishing operations
bond. May imprint or emboss lettering on not elsewhere classified.
cover.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 7323
Code 7323 Title Print Finishing and Binding
Title Print Finishing and Binding Workers
Workers
7323.0400 Sub Division 74
Book Binding Worker
Electrical and Electronics Trades
Workers
Book Binding Workers bind book and
perform operations such as those who set Electrical and electronics trades workers
and operate machines to fold printed install, fit and maintain electrical wiring
sheets, gather and sew book signatures, systems and machinery and other
make covers and glue them on book electrical apparatus, electrical
edges with plain, mixed colours or gold transmission and supply lines and cables,
leaf, etc. and electronic and telecommunications
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: equipment and systems.
The work is carried out by hand and by
Code 7323
hand-powered and other tools which are
VOLUME II B 210
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
used to reduce the amount of physical apparatus and electrical transmission and
effort and time required for specific tasks, supply lines and cables.
as well as to improve the quality of the
products. The tasks call for an Occupations in this Group are classified
understanding of the work organization, into the following Families:
the materials and tools used, and the
nature and purpose of the final product.
7411 Building and Related Electricians
Tasks performed usually include:
7412 Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
installing, maintaining, fitting and
7413 Electrical Line Installers and
adjusting electrical and electronic wiring
Repairers
systems, machinery and equipment;
7419 Electrical and Electronic Equipment
examining blueprints, wiring diagrams and
Mechanics and Fitters and Related
specifications to determine sequences
Workers, Not Elsewhere Classified
and methods of operation; inspecting and
testing electrical and electronic systems,
equipment, cables and machinery to Family 7411
identify hazards, defects, and the need for
Building and Related Electricians
adjustment or repair; installing
maintaining and repairing electrical and
Building and related electricians install,
telecommunications transmission lines;
maintain and repair electrical wiring
joining electrical, telecommunications and
systems and related equipment and
data cables; maintaining, troubleshooting,
fixtures.
fitting, adjusting, testing and repairing
electronic equipment such as commercial
7411.0100
and office machines and electronic
instruments and control systems, Electrician, General
computers, telecommunications and data
transmission equipment. Electrician, General installs, maintains and
repairs electrical machinery equipment
Occupations in this Sub Division are and fittings in factories, workshops power
classified into the following Groups: house, business and residential premises
etc., Studies drawings and other
specifications to determine electrical
741 Electrical Equipment Installers and
circuit, installation details, etc. Positions
Repairers
and installs electrical motors,
742 Electronics and telecommunication
transformers, switchgears. Switchboards,
Installers and Repairers
Microphones, loud-speakers and other
electrical equipment, fittings and lighting
Group 741
fixtures. Makes connections and solders
Electrical Equipment Installers and terminals. Tests electrical installations and
Repairers equipment and locates faults using
megger, test lamps etc. Repairs or
replaces defective wiring, burnt out fuses
Electrical equipment installers and
and defective parts and keeps fittings and
repairers install, fit and maintain electrical
fixtures in working order. May do
wiring systems and related equipment,
armature winding, draw wires and cables
electrical machinery and other electrical
and do simple cable jointing. May
VOLUME II B 211
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
operate, attend and maintain electrical Qualification Pack Details:
motors, pumps etc. QP NOS Reference ELE/Q4605
QP NOS Name CCTV
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Installation Technician
Code 7411 NSQF Level 4
Title Building and Related Electricians
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7411.0101 Code 7411
Access Controls Installation Title Building and Related Electricians
Technician
7411.0200
Electrician (Mines)
Access Controls Installation Technician, is
also called ‘Access Control Device
Installer’. The Access Control Installation Electrician (Mines) studies the details of
Technician provides after sale support the mines and relevant drawing, etc. to
services for access control devices and determine the electrical circuits,
systems such as point of sale scanners, installation details, etc. Installs in mines,
finger print or iris scan. The individual at lights and switches, motors, transformers,
work is responsible for installing the switchgears, switch board fittings and
access control system at the customer’s lighting fixtures whether flame proof or
premises. The individual undertakes site not within the mine or relating to the
assessment, installs the hardware and mines. Maintains and repairs the electrical
integrates the system to meet customer’s machinery equipment, cap lamps, other
requirement. fittings in mines, etc. Tests the electrical
installations and equipment as prescribed
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: under the mines regulations and Indian
Electricity Rules. Locates the faults using
Code 7411
megger, test lamp, etc. Repairs defective
Title Building and Related Electricians
wiring, burnt out fuses and defective parts
and keeps fittings and fixtures in working
7411.0102
order. Operates or maintains electrical
CCTV Installation Technician
motors, pumps, etc. including those which
are in flame proof fitting, intrinsically safe
Access Controls Installation Technician:
apparatus, etc. Conversant with general
Also called ‘Access Control Device
rules of maintenance of the electrical
Installer’, the Access Control Installation
equipment and wiring as per the mines
Technician provides after sale support
regulations and Indian Electricity Rules.
services for access control devices and
Knows how to test for methane gas and
systems such as point of sale scanners,
able to switch off electricity from the
finger print or iris scan. The individual at
concerned part of the mine where
work is responsible for installing the
percentage of methane gas is more than
access control system at the customer’s
1.25%. Observes all safety precautions on
premises. The individual undertakes site
the switching side avoiding sparking.
assessment, installs the hardware and
Knows conversion of AC and DC;
integrates the system to meet customer’s
conversant with the electrical hazards
requirement.
within the mines. He is also responsible
VOLUME II B 212
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
for thorough examination of all apparatus checks installed wiring for leakage and
(including the testing of conductors and continuity using megger, removes faults if
metallic coverings for continuity) as often any and certifies wiring as correct for
as may be necessary to prevent danger, connecting mains. Checks existing wiring
examination and testing of all apparatus for defects and restores current supply by
erected or re-erected in the Mine before replacing defective switches, plug sockets,
it is put into service in a new position. He blown fuse etc. or removing short circuits
is personally responsible for the and faulty wiring as necessary. May repair
maintenance at the mine of a log-book simple electrical domestic appliances.
made up of daily log sheets prepared in
the prescribed form. Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7302
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: QP NOS Name Wireman-Control
Code 7411 Panel
Title Building and Related Electricians NSQF Level 3
7411.0301 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Wireman, Light and Power Code 7411
Title Building and Related Electricians
Wireman, Light and Power installs various
kinds of electrical wiring such as cleat, 7411.0500
conduit, casing, concealed etc. in houses, Meter Sealer, Electrical
factories, workshops and other
establishments for light and power supply. Meter Sealer, Electrical seals electrical
Studies diagram and plan of wiring and meters, main switch boards and
marks light, power and other points consumers cut outs using special sealing
accordingly. Fixes wooden pegs, sizes plier, wire and lead to prevent tampering
tubes, saws casings, etc. by common and pilferage of current. Visits consumers
carpentry fitting and other processes, premises, industrial places etc., connected
according to type of wiring needed. Erects with electric supply. Checks current supply
switch boards and fixes switch box casings equipment such as meters, fuse boxes, cut
cleats, conduits ceiling roses, switches, outs etc. for proper fixing. Seals meters
meters etc. according to type and plan of main switch cover and cut outs where
wiring. Draws wire in two way or three- necessary using wire lead and sealing
way wiring system as prescribed and plier, to ensure that no one can open or
makes electrical connections through tamper with without breaking their
plugs and switches to different points respective seals. Makes periodical visits to
exercising great care for safety and premises to check whether meter seals
avoiding short circuit and earthing at any and switches are intact and are not
stage of wiring. Fixes fuses and covers as tampered with for illegal use of electric
per diagram and insulates all naked wires current. Reports to superiors of illegal
at diversions and junctions to eliminate tapping from supply lines. May attend
chances of short circuit and earthing. Fits calls to replace fuses.
light brackets, holders, shades, tube and
mercury lights, fans etc. and makes ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
electrical connection as necessary. Tests
Code 7411
VOLUME II B 213
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Building and Related Electricians Electrical mechanics and fitters fit, adjust,
install and repair electrical machinery and
7411.0600 other electrical apparatus and equipment
Electrician, Stage and Studio in buildings, factories, workshops, or
other places.
Electrician, Stage and Studio controls
lighting equipment, such as flood lamps, 7412.0100
strip lights, and spotlights from projection Mechanic, Precision Instrument,
room and front or backstage areas of Electrical
theatre to cast spotlight on stage
performers. Places spotlights in specified
Mechanic Precision Instrument Electrical;
locations in theatre and connects wiring
Meter Repairer, Electrical repairs and sets
for lighting. Moves spotlight to follow
electrical parts of precision instruments
movements of performers with beam of
such as megger, voltmeter, ammeter,
light, according to instructions on
condensers, galvanometers, etc., to high
prepared cue sheet. Turns colour wheel,
accuracy for recording correct readings by
causing light to be diffused through
reviving, replacements and necessary
varicoloured gelatine disks to change
adjustments. Studies drawings, circuit
colour of light. Cleans and adjusts light,
diagrams and other specifications and
replacing carbons or bulbs as needed.
examines instrument visually to locate any
May insert varicoloured gelatine sheets in
apparent loose connection, short circuits
frame to assemble colour wheel.
etc. Dismantles instrument using insulated
screw drivers, pliers, special spanners etc.,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and checks components, insulation wiring,
Code 7411 fittings and other features with precision
Title Building and Related Electricians mechanical and electrical measuring
instruments to locate wear and tear, short
7411.9900 circuits and other defects. Cleans
Building and Related Electricians, necessary or any fluid used in instrument
Other and their various parts using special
brushes. Checks gear shell, bearing jewels
and other operating parts and repairs or
Building and Related Electricians, other
replaces worn out and damaged ones.
include all other electricians engaged in
Assembles parts, replaces insulation and
installation, maintenance and repairing of
makes electrical wiring and connections
electrical wiring systems and related
according to diagram and prescribed
equipment not elsewhere classified.
specification. Examines assembled or
repaired instrument by standard tests,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
makes necessary adjustments and ensures
Code 7411
correct reading and desired performance
Title Building and Related Electricians
within prescribed limits. Seals cut-outs,
meters etc. to avoid manipulation. May
wind coils, set new resistance and
Family 7412
perform other electrical functions, if
Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
required.
VOLUME II B 214
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 7412
Code 7412 Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
7412.0103
7412.0101 Automated Optical Inspection
Automation Specialist Operator
Individuals at this job are responsible for Assembly Operator assembles all parts
providing support to production and modules of a patient monitoring
operations through maintenance of device (PMD) or X-Ray machine to
process control systems installed at shop complete the product. The individual at
floor for various manufacturing processes. work fits together different electronics
and electro-mechanical parts and modules
Qualification Pack Details: and connects them to manufacture the
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q6807 PMD or X-Ray machine as per product
QP NOS Name Automation design.
Specialist
NSQF Level 5 Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q6601
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: QP NOS Name Automated Optical
Code 7412 Inspection Operator
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters NSQF Level 4
7412.0102 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
In-circuit Testing Machine Operator Code 7412
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
In-Circuit Testing (ICT) Machine Operator
7412.0104
conducts tests on assembled printed
circuit boards (PCB) to identify Bare Board Testing Operator
manufacturing defects. The individual at
work is responsible for testing the PCB Bare Board Testing Operator conducts
assembly by using the ICT machine to electrical test on printed circuit board
check for short circuits, open circuits, (PCB), post manufacturing. The individual
missing components, incorrect at work operates a scanner to verify each
components and incorrect placing of circuit connection of the manufactured
components – that is parts with limited or PCB in order to check for any ‘shorts’ or
known variations. ‘open’ on the single or multilayer boards
ensuring that the bare board performs as
Qualification Pack Details: per original circuit design.
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q6602
QP NOS Name In-circuit Testing Qualification Pack Details:
Machine Operator QP NOS Reference ELE/Q2401
NSQF Level 4 QP NOS Name Bare Board Testing
Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: NSQF Level 4
VOLUME II B 215
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: test coils. May specialize in repairs of
Code 7412 particular equipment manufacturing,
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters installation or power house work and be
designated accordingly.
7412.0200
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Electrical Fitter
Code 7412
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
Electrical Fitter fits and assembles
electrical machinery and equipment such
7412.0201
as motors, transformers, generators,
switchgears, fans etc., Studies drawings Fitter-Electrical and Electronic
and wiring diagrams of fittings, wiring and Assembly
assemblies to be made. Collects
prefabricated electrical and mechanical Fitter-Electrical and Electronic Assembly
components according to drawing and assembles the electrical panels,
wiring diagrams and checks them with equipment/systems and electronic
gauges, megger etc. to ensure proper products, inclusive of components, sub-
function and accuracy. Fits mechanical assemblies, or completed
components, resistance, insulators, etc., equipment/systems. Along with soldering
as per specifications, doing supplementary techniques and anti-static protection
tooling where necessary. Follows wiring techniques assemble with the mechanical
diagrams, makes electrical connections equipment.
and solders points as specified. Checks for
continuity, resistance, circuit shorting, Qualification Pack Details:
leakage, earthing, etc. at each stage of
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0402
assembly using megger, ammeter,
QP NOS Name Fitter-Electrical and
voltmeter and other appliances and
Electronic Assembly
ensures stipulated performance of both
NSQF Level 3
mechanical and electrical components
filled in assembly. Erects various
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
equipment such as bus bars, panel boards,
Code 7412
electrical posts, fuse boxes switch gears,
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
meters, relays etc. using non-conductors,
insulation hoisting equipment as
7412.0202
necessary for receipt and distribution of
Mechanical Fitter
electrical current to feeder lines. Installs
motors, generators, transformer etc. as
per drawings using lifting and hoisting Mechanical Fitter follows assembly
equipment as necessary, does prescribed drawings in order to install various devices
electrical wiring, and connects to supply such as meters, switches, LEDs at defined
line. Locates faults in case of breakdown slots in the panel. The individual at work is
and replaces blown out fuse, burnt coils, responsible for fitting the control devices
switches, conductors etc. as required. of the panel at defined slots, once the
Checks, dismantles, repairs and overhauls outer casing of the panel has been
electrical units periodically or as required assembled.
according to scheduled procedure. May
VOLUME II B 216
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Qualification Pack Details: relay springs, and connects new or
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q6302 adjusted relay to test board. Switches on,
QP NOS Name Mechanical Fitter records flow of current by meter reading
NSQF Level 4 and adjusts spring tension and gap
between relay contacts to flow. Maintains
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: record and cleans relay periodically. May
wind primary and secondary coils.
Code 7412
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7412.0203 Code 7412
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
Iron and Steel Fitter: Electrical
Assembly
7412.0400
Armature Winder
Iron and Steel: Fitter Electrician Assembly
identifies the operations required to
Armature Winder winds and repairs
assemble various components of the
armatures, field coils, etc. of motors and
machine by studying their engineering
dynamos. Dismantles motor and removes
drawings, fitting different components of
armature to examine and test for
the machine and testing the assembled
continuity. Cleans segments, of
machine.
commutator with abrasive cloth or sand
paper and cleans carbon brushes for even
Qualification Pack Details:
and smooth movement. Examines burnt
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0901
out armature and checks type of winding
QP NOS Name Iron & Steel: Fitter
to determine gauge (thickness) and
Electrician Assembly
number of turns of wire required. Cuts out
NSQF Level #N/A
all wiring from slots and cleans slots with
blunt knife and sand paper. Mounts
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
cleaned core horizontally on frame for
Code 7412
easy rotation by hand and covers bottom
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
of each slot with insulating paper. Selects
correct gauge of wire for winding and
7412.0300
fastens one end of it to core of armature.
Adjuster, Relays Determines type of winding to be done
either by calculation or from examined
Adjuster, Relays tests and adjusts relays sample and winds each set of slot with
(electrical equipment) used for controlling wire by rotating armature on frame to
flow of electric current. Sets relay on pass wire from slot to slot to form coil.
testing table, checks flow of current, Stops winding after required number of
insulation and condition of various turns and length of wire have been wound
components and repairs or replaces to form coil. Covers all exposed wire with
defective parts. Cleans, aligns and insulating tape and solders free ends of
measures gap between contact points and wire according to calculation and type of
sets clearance to specified standard by winding with respective segments of
tightening or loosening adjustment commutator using hand soldering iron.
screws, nuts and bolts, sets tension of Pushes prepared wire coils in position in
VOLUME II B 217
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
insulated slots in heavy duty or high for continuity. May clean and oil coil
power armatures and assists Fitter, winding machine.
Electrical in soldering terminals to
respective commutator segments in ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
proper positions. Tests rewound Code 7412
armatures for efficiency and continuity, Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
before further processing by Operator,
Impregnation Plant. Replaces armature 7412.0600
and coil in shell and assembles motor.
Electrician, Aircraft
Tests performance of motor under normal
working conditions and makes necessary
Electrician, Aircraft installs and services
replacements of parts like carbon brushes,
electrical wiring and equipment in aircraft.
insulating, etc. May wind coils on
Tests electrical installation and
machines. May impregnate armature and
equipment, supply of current, and
coils with varnish in impregnation plant to
continuity of electrical circuit in aircraft,
insulate them.
using megger, voltmeter, avometer etc.
and locates faults. Repairs or replaces
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
defective wiring, connector plunge, blown
Code 7412
fuses, defective parts and electrical
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
fittings and fixtures and maintains them in
working order. Adjusts voltage regulators,
7412.0500
actuators etc. as scheduled. Ensures that
Coil Winder, Machine all connections to various lighting system
such as landing light, anti-collision lights,
Coil Winder, Machine; Coil Winding wink tip lights etc. are intact covered and
Machine Operator operates coil winding insulated. Ensures that storage battery in
machine to make coils of required shape aircraft is kept fully charged and that acid
and size used in electric motors, dynamos, level is above batter plates. Checks
transformer, radios and other electrical voltage, polarity, phase rotation etc. and
equipment. Fits metals or wooden core of supplies electric power from ground
required shape and size on revolving power trolley (ground generator) to start
mechanism of machine. Places roll of wire aircraft engine before taking off. Tests
of required gauge at correct height on defective motors, generators etc. using
machine stand. Draws free end of wire testing equipment and gets burnt coils or
over core through guides in machine and armature re-wound by Armature Winder.
sticks it at its edge. Adjusts meter fitted to May do armature winding. May repair
machine to record specified number of batteries.
turns of core. Starts machine and watches
meter to wind required number of turns ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
of wire over core. Cuts wire, bends its free Code 7412
end slightly to keep coil in position and Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
removes coil from machine. Wraps
insulation cloth and tape over coil. 7412.0701
Maintains account of output and wire
Electrician, Automobile
used. May wind coils manually and test
VOLUME II B 218
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Electrician, Automobile installs, repairs breakdown equipment by fetching the
replaces and overhauls wiring, starters, tools, spares and providing material
generators, distributors and other handling support.
electrical equipment of motor vehicles.
Examines vehicle battery, checks voltage Qualification Pack Details:
and specific gravity using special QP NOS Reference ASC/Q6806
equipment such as voltmeter hydrometer, QP NOS Name Maintenance
heavy discharge tester, etc. and ensures Assistant/Helper
that battery is in good condition. Checks NSQF Level 2
vehicle wiring, locates faults and rectifies
defects by replacing damaged wire or ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
connecting ends with insulation tape.
Code 7412
Starts engine to check whether alternator
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
is charging correctly, and if distributor,
condenser coil and cut out are functioning
7412.0901
properly. Estimates nature of defects and
Potting and Curing Operator
reports components to be replaced or
repaired. Dismantles and repairs electrical
units and components such as generator, The Potting and Curing Operator fills the
distributor etc. where required. Replaces auto electronic assembly with epoxy
repaired kit or unit in vehicle and compound for resistance from vibration
connects it with battery. Conducts and protection from environment. The
thorough examination of various electrical individual at work is responsible for
fittings such as lights, panel indicators, preparing potting compound, filling the
fuel pumps, etc. and rectifies defects. auto electronic assembly with potting and
Checks condition and makes necessary curing them in oven for setting.
adjustments. May do armature winding.
May drive vehicles on road. May charge
batteries. Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q6603
Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Name Potting and Curing
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1408 Operator
QP NOS Name Automotive NSQF Level 4
Electrician
NSQF Level 4 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7412
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
Code 7412
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters 7412.1001
Mechanical Fitter-Control Panel
7412.0801
Maintenance Assistant/Helper Mechanical fitter – Control Panel: The
Mechanical Fitter follows assembly
Maintenance Assistant/Helper is drawings in order to install various devices
responsible for providing assistance to the such as meters, switches, LEDs at defined
maintenance personnel in repairing of the slots in the panel. The individual at work is
VOLUME II B 219
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
responsible for fitting the control devices ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
of the panel at defined slots, once the Code 7412
outer casing of the panel has been Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
assembled.
Family 7413
Qualification Pack Details:
Electrical Line Installers and
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7303
Repairers
QP NOS Name Mechanical Fitter-
Control Panel
Electrical Line Installers and Repairers
NSQF Level 3
install, repair and join electrical
transmission and supply cables and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
related equipment.
Code 7412
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
7413.0100
7412.1002
Lineman, Light and Power
Site Engineer-Control Panel
Lineman, Light and Power erects and
The Site Engineer provides after sales
maintains overhead electric power lines to
support and is responsible for installing
conduct electricity from power plant to
and commissioning the control panel at
place of use. Erects poles and small
customer’s site. The individual at work is
towers at specified distances with
responsible for installing the control panel
assistance of other workers. Climbs poles
at customer site and ensure its operation
and towers and fixes insulators, lightning
on being powered up.
arresters, cross-brass etc. and other
auxiliary equipment at proper heights.
Qualification Pack Details:
Strings and draws cables (wires) through
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7501
insulators fixed on cross bars, exercising
QP NOS Name Site Engineer-
great care to leave proper sag in wires to
Control Panel
avoid breakage under changing
NSQF Level 4
atmospheric conditions. Joins cable by
various methods, fixes joint-boxes at
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
specified places, replaces fuses and faulty
Code 7412
components as necessary and tests for
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
electrical continuity. Checks overhead
lines in allotted section as necessary and
7412.9900
maintains them in order for carrying
Electrical Mechanics and Fitters, electricity by effecting repairs of defective
Other lines, poles, towers and auxiliary
equipment as directed. May install and
Electrical Mechanics and Fitters, other repair overhead power lines for electric
include all other workers engaged in trains, trams or trolley buses. May work
fitting, assembling, repairing and on high tension or low tension power
maintaining electrical equipment, lines.
machinery, appliances, etc., not
elsewhere classified. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 220
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Code 7413 equipment. Studies blue prints and wiring
Title Electrical Line Installers and diagrams of equipment to be checked and
Repairers examines connections, circuits and links of
group selector, final selector and un-
7413.9900 selector racks. Connects equipment to
Electrical Line Installers, Repairers testing instrument and tests it to detect
faults, if any. Records defects and faults to
and Cable Jointers, Other
be rectified, gets them removed and
retest it after rectification to ensure
Electrical Line Installers, Repairers and
conformity with prescribed specifications
Cable Jointers perform number of routine
and operational efficiency. May design
and low skilled tasks in erecting and
test sets to examine complex circuits and
maintaining overhead lines, joining cables,
equipment.
etc., and are designated as Lineman's
Mate; Cable Jointer Helper; etc., according
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to work performed.
Code 0
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters;
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Electronics Mechanics and
Code 7413
Servicers
Title Electrical Line Installers and
Repairers
7419.0200
Junior Functioner (Telephone
Family 7419
Equipment Manufacturing)
Electrical and Electronic Equipment
Mechanics and Fitters and Related
Junior Functioner (Telephone Equipment
Workers, Not Elsewhere Classified
Manufacturing) performs operational
tests of repetitive nature on assembled
This Family covers workers not elsewhere telephonic apparatus, gets defects
classified in the Group 724, Electrical and removed and ensures operational
electronic equipment mechanics and efficiency. Mounts apparatus such as
fitters. For instance, occupations involving automatic switching apparatus, step by
inspection of step telephone switches, relay sets, group
television receivers during final assembly, selector, final selector, un selector, racks,
checking of telephone and telegraph etc. on standard test unit. Operates
equipment, testing apparatus and observes readings.
doing armature and coil winding, repairing Notes faults and defections detected by
and charging battery, replacing blown out readings observed for repairs particularly
fuses etc. with reference to circuit diagrams and
functioning instruction sheet of each
7419.0100 apparatus. Tests apparatus again after
rectification of faults, and certifies tests
Senior Functioned (Telephone
checked apparatus for operational
Equipment Manufacturing)
efficiency. May conduct minor repairs of
standard test unit.
Senior Functioner (Telephone Equipment
Manufacturing) checks, locates faults and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sets various kinds of complex telephone
VOLUME II B 221
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Code 0 standardized procedures and records
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters; defects and faults of assembly on quality
Electronics Mechanics and control charts. Tests apparatus after
Servicers rectification and certifies assembly to be
in conformity with requirements.
7419.0300
Wiring Inspector and Bank Tester ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
(Telephone Equipment Code 0
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters;
Manufacturing)
Electronics Mechanics and
Servicers
Wiring Inspector and Bank Tester
(Telephone Equipment Manufacturing)
7419.0500
tests operational efficiency of switch
Battery Servicing Man
wiring, bank multiple wiring, rack wiring
and cables, and gets defects removed.
Battery Servicing Man; Battery Charger
Checks wiring for colours and gauges to
charges storage batteries used in motor
ensure conformity with prescribed
vehicles, aircraft and other electrical
specifications. Tests wiring for continuity
equipment. Places batteries on table,
and leakage using buzzar and megger
unscrews caps of cell and checks specific
(testing instruments). Records defects in
gravity of electrolyte (acid solution) in cell
charts for rectification. Tests and
with hydrometer. Pours required amount
approves wiring for conformity with
of distilled water or dilute acid into cell as
prescribed specifications after removal of
necessary to submerge cell plates with
wiring defects and other faults.
electrolyte solution and adjust its
strength. Connects battery with charging
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
set as prescribed and switches on flow of
Code 0
current. Observes flow of electricity and
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters;
rate of charging from ammeter readings,
Electronics Mechanics and
regulates it as necessary by control switch
Servicers
and keeps battery on charge for specified
period. Switches off charging set and
7419.0400
checks specific gravity of electrolyte and
Inspector, Assembly (Telephone
voltage acquired by battery, using
Equipment Manufacturing) hydrometer and voltmeter respectively.
Fixes cell caps of battery securely to avoid
Inspector, Assembly (Telephone splashing of electrolyte solution. May
Equipment Manufacturing) inspects repair batteries and maintain account of
assemblies and sub-assemblies of batteries charged. May charge number of
switches, phones and other telephone batteries simultaneously by connecting
and telegraph equipment and gets defects their terminals in series to battery
removed. Checks wiring and different charger.
components of apparatus for conformity
with specifications, using simple tests, sets ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and gauges. Checks assembly with charts, Code 7412
blue prints and other prescribed Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
VOLUME II B 222
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7419.0600 and maintaining electronic and electrical
Operator, Impregnation Plant equipment, machinery, appliances, etc.,
not elsewhere classified
(Telephone Equipment
Manufacturing)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 0
Operator, Impregnation Plant (Electrical
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters;
Equipment Manufacturing) operates
Electronics Mechanics and
impregnation plant to dip assembled coils
Servicers
and armatures in tank containing molten
insulating material like wax or varnish and
Group 742
dries dipped articles in baking plant
Electronics and Telecommunication
(electric drying chamber). Feeds solid wax
or varnish into heating tank of plant. Installers and Repairers
Switches on electric heaters and observes
thermometer readings to heat and melt Electronics and telecommunications
insulting materials completely. Dips coils
installers and repairers fit, maintain,
or other materials to be insulated into
adjust and repair electronic equipment
tank either manually or with hoisting
such as commercial and office machines
equipment and keeps them in solution for
and electronic instruments and control
prescribed period. Shuts lid of tank and
operates vacuum pump of machine to systems and install, repair and maintain
ensure that all parts of dipped articles are telecommunications equipment, data
completely covered with insulating
transmission equipment, cables, antennae
materials. Removes dipped articles and
and repair, fit and maintain computers.
hangs them to drip of excess insulation.
Places articles in electrical baking plant Occupations in this Group are classified
and dries them at fixed temperature for into the following Families:
set period of time. Cleans plant and
maintains account of articles handled.
7421 Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
7422 Information and Communications
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Technology Installers and Servicers
Code 0
Title Electrical Mechanics and Fitters;
Electronics Mechanics and
Family 7421
Servicers
Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
7419.9900
Electronics mechanics and servicers fit,
Electrical and Electronic Equipment
maintain, adjust and repair electronic
Mechanics and Fitters and Related
equipment such as commercial and office
Workers, Other
machines and electronic instruments and
control systems.
Electrical and Electronic Equipment
Mechanics and Fitters and Related
7421.0100
Workers, Other include all other workers
Electronics Fitter, General
engaged in fitting, assembling, repairing
VOLUME II B 223
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Electronics Fitter, General fits, assembles
and repairs various kinds of electronic Electronics Fitter, other include all other
equipment in factory or workshop or at workers engaged in fitting, assembling,
place of use. Examines drawings and repairing and maintaining electronic
wiring diagrams; checks parts for accuracy equipment, machinery, appliances, etc.,
of fit and minor adjustments; assembles not elsewhere classified.
parts or mounts them on chassis or panels
with aid of hand tools; installs and
connects wiring, soldering joints ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
equipment, diagnoses faults with aid of Code 7421
electronic testing equipment; dismantles Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
equipment if required and replaces faulty
parts or wiring. 7421.0300
Electronic Mechanic
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7421
Electronics Mechanic; Electronic
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
Equipment Mechanic repairs electronic
equipment, such as computers, industrial
7421.0101
controls, radar systems, transmitters, and
Iron and Steel Fitter: Electronic telemetering control systems following
Assembly blueprints and manufacturer's
specifications and using hand tools and
Iron and Steel Fitter Electronic Assembler test instruments. Tests faulty equipment
assembles and wires up electronic and applies knowledge of functional
equipment and systems to mechanical operation of electronic units and systems
equipment. It involves the assembly of to diagnose cause of malfunction. Tests
electronic products, inclusive of electronic components and circuits to
components, subassemblies or completed locate defects, using instruments, such as
equipment and systems. Along with oscilloscopes, signal generators,
soldering and anti-static protection ammeters and voltmeters. Replaces
technique assembly with mechanical defective components and wiring and
components. adjusts mechanical parts, using hand tools
and soldering iron. Aligns, adjusts and
Qualification Pack Details: calibrates testing instruments. Maintains
records of repairs, calibrations and test.
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0902
May install equipment in industrial or
QP NOS Name Iron &
military establishments and in aircraft.
Steel_Fitter_Electro
nic Assemble
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
NSQF Level #N/A
Code 7421
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
Code 7421
7421.0401
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
Field Technician, Air Conditioner
7421.0200
Electronics Fitters, Other
VOLUME II B 224
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Field Technician, Air Conditioner is also,
called AC repair Technician, this is an after ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sales service job for installing and Code 7421
providing support to the air conditioner Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
buyers. The individual at work installs the
air conditioner and interacts with 7421.0601
customers to diagnose the problem and
Field Technician, Washing Machine
assess possible causes. Once the problem
and causes have been identified, the
Field Technician, Washing Machine is also,
individual rectifies minor problems or
called ‘Washing machine Repair
replaces faulty modules for failed parts or
Technician’, this job is about providing
recommends factory repairs for bigger
after sales service to customers. The
faults.
individual at work installs the washing
machine, interacts with customers to
Qualification Pack Details:
diagnose the problem and assesses
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3102
possible causes of fault reported. Once
QP NOS Name Field Technician: Air
the problem and causes have been
Conditioner
identified, the individual rectifies minor
NSQF Level 4
problems or replaces faulty modules for
failed parts or recommends factory
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
repairs for bigger faults.
Code 7421
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3103
7421.0501
QP NOS Name Field Technician:
Field Technician, Refrigerator Washing Machine
NSQF Level 4
Field Technician, Refrigerator is also,
called ‘Fridge Technician’, the Refrigerator ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Field Technician provides installation and Code 7421
after sales service to the refrigerator Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
buyers. The individual at work interacts
with customers to install the refrigerator 7421.0701
and diagnose the problem to assess
Field Technician, Other Home
possible causes of malfunction. Once the
Appliances
problem and causes have been identified,
the individual rectifies minor problems or
Field Technician, Other Home Appliances
replaces faulty modules for failed parts or
is also called, ‘Home Appliance Repair
recommends factory repairs for bigger
Technician’, this is an after sales service
faults.
job for installing and providing support to
the water purifier, mixer/grinder buyers.
Qualification Pack Details:
The individual at work installs the
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3101
appliance and interacts with customers to
QP NOS Name Field Technician:
diagnose the problem and possible
Refrigerator
causes. Once the problem and causes
NSQF Level 4
have been identified, the individual
VOLUME II B 225
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
rectifies minor problems or replaces faulty Field Technician: Digital Camera is also
modules for failed parts or recommends called, ‘Camera Repair Technician’, the
factory repairs for bigger faults. Digital Camera Field Technician provides
after sales service to camera buyers. The
Qualification Pack Details: individual at work interacts with
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3104 customers to diagnose the problem to
QP NOS Name Field Technician, assess possible causes of malfunction.
Other Home Once the problem and causes have been
Appliances identified, the individual rectifies minor
NSQF Level 4 problems or replaces faulty modules for
failed parts.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Qualification Pack Details:
Code 7421
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3107
QP NOS Name Field Technician,
7421.0801 Digital Camera
NSQF Level 4
Field Technician: UPS and Inverter
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Field Technician: UPS and Inverter is also
Code 7421
called, ‘UPS repair Technician’, this is an
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
after sales service job for installing and
providing support to customers of
7421.1001
different types of UPS and inverters. The
Field Engineer-RACW
individual at work installs the newly
purchased UPS or inverter. The individual
also and interacts with customers to Field Engineer-RAWC is also, called
diagnose problems in them, assesses ‘Service Engineer’, the Field Engineer
possible causes, rectifies faults or replaces provides installation and after sales
faulty modules or recommends factory service on multiple appliances such as
repairs for bigger faults. refrigerator, air conditioner and washing
machine. The individual at work interacts
Qualification Pack Details: with customers to install the appliance
and diagnose the problem to assess
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7201
possible causes of malfunction. Once the
QP NOS Name Field Technician:
problem and causes have been identified,
UPS and Inverter
the individual rectifies minor problems or
NSQF Level 4
replaces faulty modules for failed parts or
recommends factory repairs for bigger
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
faults.
Code 7421
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3105
7421.0901
QP NOS Name Field Engineer-
Field Technician: Digital Camera
RAWC
NSQF Level 4
VOLUME II B 226
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7421 Code 7421
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
7421.1101 7421.1202
Repair Assistant: Switches Testing Technician
Repair Assistant is responsible for Testing Technician sorts, inspects and
diagnosing the faulty sub system and tests the resistors and capacitors to check
addressing first-level complaints and value and conformance with specified
servicing of industrial-communications standards. The individual at work is
switches. The individual at work diagnoses responsible for testing the resistor or
and carries out repairs communication capacitor using test and measuring
switches by dismantling, removing and equipment, jigs and visual aids in order to
replacing faulty systems or sub systems or ensure that they are of correct value, and
assembly. are painted and marked as per company’s
specifications.
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q8103 Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Name Repair Assistant: QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0111
Switches QP NOS Name Testing Technician-
NSQF Level 4 Passive components
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7421 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers Code 7421
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
7421.1201
Auto-Tester Capacitor 7421.1301
TV Repair Technician
Auto-Tester programs the auto testing
machine for segregating defective TV Repair Technician is also, called ‘Field
capacitors from passed ones. The Technician–TV’, the TV Repair Technician
individual at work is responsible for provides after sales service to customers.
testing the capacitor using automated The individual at work interacts with
testing machine for electrical, tan-delta customers to install the TV as well as
and capacitance as per machine diagnose the problem and assess possible
specifications. causes of fault reported. Once the
problem and causes have been identified,
Qualification Pack Details: the individual rectifies minor problems or
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0103 replaces faulty modules for failed parts or
QP NOS Name Auto-tester recommends factory repairs for bigger
Capacitor faults.
NSQF Level 4
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3105
VOLUME II B 227
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
QP NOS Name TV Repair layout requirement as per design,
Technician assesses precautionary measures to be
NSQF Level 4 taken, installs the solar panel as per
customer’s requirement and ensures
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: effective functioning of the system post
Code 7421 installation.
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
Qualification Pack Details:
7421.1302 QP NOS Reference ELE/Q5901
Field Engineer TV QP NOS Name Solar Panel
Installation
Technician
Field Engineer TV is also called, ‘Service
NSQF Level 4
Engineer – TV’, the TV Field Engineer
provides installation and after sales
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
service to buyers of TV and other
consumer electronic products such as Code 7421
home theatre system, DVD and Blu-ray Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
players, audio systems, headphones etc.
The individual at work interacts with 7421.1402
customers to install the entertainment Solar Photo Voltaic System
system and diagnose any problems to Installation Technician
assess possible causes of malfunction.
Once the problem and causes have been
Solar PV System Installation Engineer is
identified, the individual rectifies minor
responsible for designing and installing
problems or replaces faulty modules for
the solar photovoltaic system at the
failed parts or recommends factory
customer’s premises to meeting their
repairs for bigger faults.
power requirement. The individual at
work evaluates the installation site,
Qualification Pack Details:
designs the installation, plans and
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3108 arranges for materials, and ensures
QP NOS Name Field Engineer TV smooth installation process. The
NSQF Level 4 individual also supervises the installation
technicians’ work.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7421 Qualification Pack Details:
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers QP NOS Reference ELE/Q5902
QP NOS Name Solar PV System
7421.1401 Installation
Solar Panel Installation Technician Engineer
NSQF Level 5
Solar Panel Installation Technician is also
known as ‘Panel Installer’, the Solar Panel ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Installation Technician is responsible for Code 7421
installing solar panels at the customers’ Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
premises. The individual at work checks
the installation site, understands the
VOLUME II B 228
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7421.1403 telecommunications equipment, data
PV System Installation Engineer transmission equipment, cables, antennae
and conduits and repair, fit and maintain
computers.
Solar PV System Maintenance Technician
is responsible for maintenance and
effective functioning of the installed solar
7422.0100
panels.
The individual at work cleans the installed Installation Mechanic
solar modules, checks the photovoltaic
system for uninterrupted power output Installation Mechanic (Telephone) installs
and identifies faults in the PV system. telephone equipment in telephone
exchange. Studies designs, blue prints,
Qualification Pack Details: circuit diagrams and other specifications
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q6001 for installation of equipment to be done.
QP NOS Name PV System Sets and installs switch board selector
Installation racks, relay set racks, automatic
Engineer telephone system, key board, morse sets
NSQF Level 4 and tele printer as per plan and makes
necessary electrical connections according
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: to circuit diagram. Tests installation as
prescribed to check mechanical and
Code 7421
electrical adjustments of each
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
component. Solders terminals of wires.
Test checks operational efficiency and
7421.9900
makes necessary adjustments. Installs
Electronic Mechanics and Services,
batteries and battery charging equipment
Other
and fits and maintains protective devices.
May install telephone sets at subscriber's
Electronic Mechanics and Servicers, other premises.
include all other workers engaged in
installing, servicing and repairing radios
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and television sets and other audio
Code 7422
equipment, not elsewhere classified.
Title Information and Communications
Technology Installers and Servicers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7421
7422.0200
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
Maintenance Mechanic
Family 7422
Maintenance Mechanic (Telephone) tests,
analyses defects, and maintains telephone
Information and Communications
equipment using test meters and hand
Technology Installers and Servicers
tools. Tests wiring and operation of
electrical and mechanical components of
Information and communications telephone apparatus, checks operational
technology (ICT) installers and servicers efficiency and locates faults using
install, repair and maintain voltmeter, resistance meter, watt meter,
VOLUME II B 229
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
capacity meter and other instruments as Grass Root Telecom Provider
necessary. Replaces defective (GRTP)
components, if required, and installs,
repairs and adjusts equipment such as
Grass Root Telecom Provider (GRTP) is
switches, relays amplifiers etc. using hand
responsible to keep ONT siteoperational
tools. Removes connections or wire
on 24x7 basis; maintain and repair basic
distributing frames and solders wires to
faults/issues at ONT site; promote local
terminal lugs according to diagram.
devices and provide services.
Conducts test checks periodically to
maintain apparatus in operational
Qualification Pack Details:
efficiency. May maintain telephone-
QP NOS Reference TEL/Q6202
switching equipment at private
QP NOS Name Grass Root Telecom
establishments. May maintain and repair
Provider (GRTP)
power apparatus and storage batteries.
NSQF Level 3
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7422
Code 7422
Title Information and Communications
Title Information and Communications
Technology Installers and Servicers
Technology Installers and Servicers
7422.0201
7422.0203
Fault Management Engineer
Handset Repair Engineer (Level II)
Fault Management Engineer is responsible
Handset Repair Engineer is responsible for
for monitoring network from NOC location
performing handset repair including
and maintaining network uptime by
hardware and software components and
ensuring that faults are effectively
testing the handset for adequacy post
resolved within shortest period of time.
repair.
He is also responsible for directing and co-
ordinating with the field team to carry out
Qualification Pack Details:
corrective/change activities on site in case
QP NOS Reference TEL/Q2201
field support is required.
QP NOS Name Handset Repair
Engineer (Level II)
Qualification Pack Details:
NSQF Level 4
QP NOS Reference TEL/Q6500
QP NOS Name Fault Management
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Engineer
Code 7422
NSQF Level 5
Title Information and Communications
Technology Installers and Servicers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7422
7422.0204
Title Information and Communications
Infrastructure Engineer
Technology Installers and Servicers
7422.0202
Infrastructure Engineer is responsible for
ensuring site uptime through preventive
VOLUME II B 230
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
and corrective maintenance of passive Title Information and Communications
infrastructure at sites. He also co- Technology Installers and Servicers
ordinates infrastructure upgradation
activities and ensures timely payments of 7422.0600
rent, diesel and electricity charges after Fault Controller, Telephones
validating the vendor bills.
Fault Controller, Telephones; examines
Qualification Pack Details:
reports on defects of telephone lines, and
QP NOS Reference TEL/Q6100 arranges for their rectification. Examines
QP NOS Name Infrastructure reports regarding defects in telephones,
Engineer telephone lines, etc. traces faults in
NSQF Level 5 internal system or advises Line Inspector
Telephone for getting faulty lines or
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: equipment examined and repaired by
Code 7422 maintenance staff. Advises subscribers or
Title Information and Communications customers about removal of defects and
Technology Installers and Servicers rectification of faults. Maintains record of
repairs done or defects in important cases
7422.0400 personally.
Lineman, Telephone
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Lineman, Telephone and Telegraph Code 7422
installs, repairs and maintains telephone Title Information and Communications
and telegraph lines, telephone Technology Installers and Servicers
instruments, key boards etc. in his allotted
section. Erects poles manually for 7422.0700
telephone and telegraph lines, ensuing Carrier Attendant (Telephone)
proper spacing, alignment, stability etc.,
Climbs erected poles to fix insulators, Carrier Attendant (Telephone) operates
lightning arrestors, etc. at proper levels and maintains carrier equipment for
and positions. Draws and signs wires on connecting and arranging alternative lines
poles as directed by Sub-Inspector with outside stations. Attends to and
Telephone and Telegraph allowing maintains telephone career equipment
required length for expansion and which enables multiple transmission to be
contraction of wires. Installs telephone made on single line. Tests trunk telephone
equipment and key boards at subscriber's lines.
premises, checks them periodically and on
breakdowns, locates faults and removes ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
defects by repairs or replacement of faulty
Code 7422
components and wiring. Maintains lines
Title Information and Communications
within allotted section free of faults. May
Technology Installers and Servicers
repair and lay underground cables.
7422.0800
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Cable Jointer
Code 7422
VOLUME II B 231
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Cable Jointer joins multi-conductor fault occurrence. He is also required to co-
telegraph or telephone cable consisting of ordinate activities for installation and
number of various coloured wires on the commissioning of Optical Fibre Cable (OF)
surface or underground. Selects strands of as per the route plan.
wires to be joined from cable ends
according to colour code and removes Qualification Pack Details:
insulation from end of wires in cables, QP NOS Reference TEL/Q6401
slips separate pieces of copper or lead QP NOS Name Optical Fibre
sleeves with linear slits over ends of Technician
cables and brings ends of naked wires of NSQF Level 4
cables in overlapping contacts according
to colour code. Twists overlapping ends of ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
naked wires to join strands and solders or
Code 7422
brazes each strand of wire of one cable
Title Information and Communications
with corresponding one of other. Dries
Technology Installers and Servicers
joint and wraps it with insulating material.
Adjusts sleeves over joint keeping slits
7422.0802
face to face and heats and solders sleeves
Optical Fibre Splicer
together to strengthen and protect joint
made. Screws soldered cable in position in
Optical fibre splicer is responsible for
cable junction box by tightening bolts and
ensuring efficient splicing of the optical
fuses upper portion of box with pitch or
fibre cables and supports in optical fibre
other compound to completely insulate
installation and in carrying out fibre
cable against leakage and moisture. Tests
testing using OTDR and power meter.
pairs of wires for electrical continuity and
Qualification Pack Details:
insulation, using testing equipment. May
be designated as CABLE JOINTER, QP NOS Reference TEL/Q6400
TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH OR CABLE QP NOS Name Optical Fibre Splicer
JOINTER LIGHT and POWER according to NSQF Level 3
type of cables joined.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 7422
Code 7422 Title Information and Communications
Title Information and Communications Technology Installers and Servicers
Technology Installers and Servicers
7422.0900
7422.0801 Radar Mechanic
Optical Fibre Technician
Radar Mechanic; Radar Craftsman installs,
Optical fibre technician is responsible for services and overhauls radar units. Studies
maintaining uptime and quality of the diagrams and manufacturer's specification
network segment (both optical media and and installs radar transmitting and
equipment) assigned to him by receiving equipment. Tests equipment for
undertaking periodic preventive continuity, frequency, performance, etc.,
maintenance activities and ensuring detects faults by application of knowledge
effective fault management in case of of functional operation of electronic units
and systems and removes defects by
VOLUME II B 232
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
replacing defective parts, soldering or parts of x-ray units, refilling tube heads,
tightening loose and broken connections, etc. Maintain records of types and serial
using oscilloscopes, signal generators, numbers of units handled, prepares job
wave meters, pulse modulators, echolox, sheets and obtains job completion
avometer, megger and other instruments certificates. May follow circuit diagram
and hand tools. Aligns, adjusts and and trace electrical faults. May do simple
calibrates equipment according to drilling and tapping using hand or power
specifications. Operates and flight checks drilling machines.
radar equipment on aircraft and makes
necessary repairs and adjustments to ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ensure desired efficiency. May operate Code 7422
and repair other electronic and missile Title Information and Communications
control systems. Technology Installers and Servicers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 7422.1001
Code 7422 Installation and Service Engineer
Title Information and Communications
Technology Installers and Servicers
Installation and Service Engineer is also
called Field Support Engineer, the
7422.1000
Installation and Service Engineer provides
X-Ray Mechanic after sale support services to customers at
their premises. The individual at work is
X-Ray Mechanic installs, repairs and responsible for installing medical devices,
services high frequency X-ray, ultra-violet- attending to problems making them
ray and other radio therapy equipment in functional.
hospitals and clinics. Studies circuit
diagrams and manufacturer's instructions Qualification Pack Details:
for installation. Assembles x-ray and other QP NOS Reference ELE/Q8001
physiotherapy units such as diathermy, QP NOS Name Installation and
ultra-violet-ray, infra-red units etc. and Service Engineer
installs them in hospitals and clinics. Gives NSQF Level 4
necessary power connections to x-ray and
other units. Sets up and tests auxiliary ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
units such as potter bucky table, tube
Code 7422
columns, serial changers etc., rectifies
Title Information and Communications
defects if any and ensures that they are
Technology Installers and Servicers
working smoothly and efficiently. Tests x-
ray machines and accessory equipment,
7422.1100
locates operating difficulties and removes
Television Installation Man
them by replacing fused tubes, meters,
indicators, powder cables, etc. as
Television Installation Man installs and
necessary. Repairs mechanical equipment
adjusts television receivers and antennas,
such as bucky table, hand time switch,
using hand tools. Selects antenna
locking devices etc. as required. Services
according to type of set and location of
units periodically by filling transformer
transmitting station. Bolts cross arms and
with oil, cleaning and oiling mechanical
dipole elements in position to assemble
VOLUME II B 233
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
antenna. Secures antenna in place with to SUPERVISOR. May clean and maintain
bracket and guy wires, observing tools, test equipment.
insurance codes and local ordinances to
protect installation from lighting and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
other hazards. Drills and waterproofs Code 7422
holes in building to make passage for Title Information and Communications
transmission line. Connects line between Technology Installers and Servicers
receiver and antenna and fastens it in
place. Tunes receiver on all channels and 7422.1201
adjusts screws to obtain desired density,
Set Top Box Installer/Service
linearity, focus and size of picture. Orients
Technician
antenna and installs reflector to obtain
strongest possible reception. May operate
Set Top Box Technicians are required for
radio broadcasting unit.
installing/servicing of set top boxes for
either DTH (Direct to Home) or DAS
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
(Digital Addressable System) through
Code 7422
Cable service providers. With the
Title Information and Communications
digitalization of this industry made
Technology Installers and Servicers
mandatory, their role and requirement
has become imperative for the industry.
7422.1200
Set Top Box Technician is responsible for
Cable Television Installer
installing the set top box at client’s site
and also addresses the first level
Cable Television Installer installs cable complaints and servicing, he also co-
television cables and equipment on ordinates with the technical team for
customer's premises, using electrician's activation of new connections.
tools and test equipment: Measures
television signal strength at utility pole, Qualification Pack Details:
using electronic test equipment.
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q8101
Computes impedance of wire from pole to
QP NOS Name Set Top Box
house to determine additional resistance
Installer/Service
needed for reducing signal to desired
Technician
level. Installs terminal boxes and strings
NSQF Level 4
lead-in wires, using electrician's tools.
Connects television set to cable system
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and evaluates incoming signal. Adjusts
Code 7421
and repairs cable system to ensure
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
optimum reception. May collect
installation fees and explain cable service
7422.1202
operation to subscriber. May
DTH Set-top Box Installer and
communicate with SUPERVISOR, using
two-way radio or telephone, to receive Service Technician
instructions or technical advice and to
report problems to be repaired. May DTH Set-Top Box Installer and Service
report unauthorized use of cable system technician installs set-top boxes and
provides after sales service for Direct to
VOLUME II B 234
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Home (DTH) system. The individual at Television Service and Repairman repairs
work installs the set-top box at customers’ and adjusts radios and television
premises; addresses the field serviceable receivers, using hand tools and electronic
complaints and co-ordinates with the testing instruments. Tunes receiver on all
technical team for activation of new channels and observes audio and video
connections. characteristics to locate source of trouble.
Adjusts controls to obtain desired density,
Qualification Pack Details: linearity, focus and size of picture.
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q8101 Examines chassis for defects. Tests
QP NOS Name DTH Set-top Box voltages and resistance of circuits to
Installer and Service isolate defect following schematic
Technician diagram and using voltmeter,
NSQF Level 4 oscilloscope, signal generator and other
electronic testing instruments. Tests and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: changes tubes, solders loose connections
and repairs or replaces defective parts,
Code 7421
using hand tools and soldering iron.
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
Repair radios and other audio equipment.
May install television sets.
7422.1203
DAS Set-top Box Installer and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Service Technician
Code 7422
Title Information and Communications
DAS Set-Top Box Installer and Service
Technology Installers and Servicers
technician installs set-top boxes and
provides after sales service for Digital
7422.1302
Addressable System (DAS) type. The
Television Repair Technician
individual at work installs the set-top box
at customers’ premises; addresses the
Television Repair Technician job role is
field serviceable complaints and co-
applicable to both Television
ordinates with the technical team for
manufacturing facilities as well as
activation of new connections.
electronics service centres. This role
pertains to rectify faults identified during
Qualification Pack Details:
testing of TV on in manufacturing process
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q8102
and providing after sales assistance and
QP NOS Name DAS Set-top Box
ensuring appropriate functioning of
Installer and Service
television sets. A TV repair technician
Technician
identifies the section in the TV that is not
NSQF Level 4
functioning. If the problem identified is in
the Printed Circuit Board (PCB), the
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
technician identifies the specific fault in
Code 7421
the PCB and corrects it. Replaces the
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
dysfunctional PCB with a new one, if the
damage identified requires fixing at the
7422.1300
service centre.
Television Service and Repairman
VOLUME II B 235
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Qualification Pack Details: receiving sets in accordance with
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3101 diagrams and manufacturers
QP NOS Name Television Repair specifications, using hand tools and
Technician electrical measuring instrument. Removes
NSQF Level 4 radio cabinet from chassis and examines
equipment for damaged components and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: loose or broken connections and wires
either by connecting set with current
Code 7421
supply or otherwise. Replaces defective
Title Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
components and parts according to
specifications such as tubes (valve),
7422.1400
condensers, transformer resistors etc.
Radio Technician (Radio
using hand tools. Makes necessary
Manufacturing)
electrical connections according to
diagrams and solders or tightens loose
Radio Technician (Radio Manufacturing) ones. Tests equipment for output
tests assembled radio sets with testing frequency, noise level, audio quality, dial
equipment to ensure that assembly calibration and other factors using
soldering, frequency, performance, etc. oscilloscopes radio frequency and watt
are in accordance with prescribed meters, ammeters, volt-meters, valve
standards. Places assembled radio set in testers etc. Tunes and aligns radio
position and visually examines it to ensure frequency and watt meters, ammeters, in
that position of components, connections, battery sets and gets them charged or
soldering, wiring, etc. are in order. replaces them if necessary. May repair
Switches on and operates different knobs transistors and television sets. May repair
to check calibration, audibility and general and service electronic equipment such as
performance of set by varying its tone and microphones, record player, tape
listening to various stations and recorders, etc.
frequencies. Tightens loose nuts and
screws, locates faults, replaces defective ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
components and conducts necessary
Code 7422
changes. Approves correctly assembled
Title Information and Communications
sets for further processing and rejects
Technology Installers and Servicers
defective ones for rectification. May tests
sets at different stages of assembly. May
7422.1600
service, repair and overhaul radio sets.
Radio Craftsman, Installation
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Radio Craftsman, Installation; Radio
Code 7422
Mechanic Installation (Aircraft) installs,
Title Information and Communications
tests and repairs aircraft radio equipment
Technology Installers and Servicers
during test flights. Studies circuit
diagrams, drawings and other
7422.1500
specifications for installation of radio
Radio Mechanic
equipment in aircraft. Tests and replaces
defective radio instruments, components
Radio Mechanic; Radio Repairer tests, and parts such as radio compass, maker,
repairs, services and maintains radio
VOLUME II B 236
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
beacon receptor, radio tubes, transformer ammeters, voltmeter, tube testers and
etc. using hand tools and electrical other appropriate instruments, adjust
measuring instruments. Installs radio receivers for sensitivity and transmitters
equipment in aircraft as specified and for maximum output. Tests batteries with
solders or tightens loose and broken hydrometers, ammeter, etc., and
connections. Operates and tests maintains them fully charged. Performs
equipment during tests flights for output, scheduled test checks of radio equipment
audio quality, frequency, calibration etc. during test flights to ensure airworthiness
and does necessary repairs and of aircraft. Removes radio instruments
adjustments to ensure efficient and components for bench-checks,
performance. Signals ground station and servicing, calibrating and over hauling of
adjusts frequencies of radio sets by radio apparatus as and when necessary.
turning sets screws. May check batteries May effect alternations and modifications
and keep them fully charged. May service to radio equipment under guidance of
battery charging set and generator. May Radio Engineer, Telecommunication.
conduct maintenance repairs of radio
equipment. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7422
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Information and Communications
Code 7422 Technology Installers and Servicers
Title Information and Communications
Technology Installers and Servicers 7422.1801
Site Surveyor/R F Site Surveyor
7422.1700
Radio Craftsman, Maintenance R F Site Surveyor is responsible for
identification offsite location, estimation
Radio Craftsman, Maintenance, Radio of tower height and determination of
Mechanic Maintenance (Aircraft) tests, antenna height and direction as per
repairs, services and maintains aircraft clutter.
radio receiving and transmitting sets in
accordance with diagrams and prescribed Qualification Pack Details:
specifications using hand tools and QP NOS Reference TEL/Q4103
electrical measuring instruments. QP NOS Name R F Site Surveyor
Examines equipment for damaged NSQF Level 4
components and loose or broken
connection and wires. Tests and replaces ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
defective radio components and parts
Code 7422
such as tubes (valve), condensers,
Title Information and Communications
transformers, resistors, etc. using hand
Technology Installers and Servicers
tools. Makes necessary electrical
connections according to diagrams and
7422.1901
solders or tightens loose ones. Tests
Assembly Line Operator
equipment for factors such as power
output, frequency power, looseness of
antennas and transmission lines, noise Assembly Line Operator assembles
level, audio frequency and watt meters, together separate modules of the IT
hardware equipment. The individual at
VOLUME II B 237
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
work is responsible for assembling the Title Information and Communications
different modules in the IT hardware to Technology Installers and Servicers
complete the product. The individual
receives different electronic and 7422.2002
electromechanical modules, fits and Installation (Computing and
assembles them together. The operator
Peripherals)
may assemble multiple modules and/or
products by following operating
Installation (Computing and Peripherals) is
procedures for different models.
also called ‘Field Technician’, the
Installation Technician provides after sale
Qualification Pack Details:
installation support services to customers,
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q4301
typically, at their premises. The individual
QP NOS Name Assembly Line
at work is responsible for installing newly
Operator
purchased products, troubleshooting
NSQF Level 4
system problems and, configuring
peripherals such as printers, scanners and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
network devices.
Code 7422
Title Information and Communications Qualification Pack Details:
Technology Installers and Servicers
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q4609
QP NOS Name Installation
7422.2001
(Computing and
Field Technician (Computing and Peripherals)
Peripherals) NSQF Level 3
Field Technician (Computing and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Peripherals) is also called ‘Service Code 7422
Technician’, the Field Technician provides Title Information and Communications
after sale support services to customers, Technology Installers and Servicers
typically, at their premises. The individual
at work is responsible for attending to 7422.2101
customer complaints, installing newly Field Technician (Networking and
purchased products, troubleshooting
Storage)
system problems and configuring
peripherals such as printers, scanners and
Field Technician (Networking and Storage)
network devices.
is also called ‘Service Technician’, the Field
Technician provides after sale support
Qualification Pack Details:
services to customers, typically, at their
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q4601
premises. The individual at work is
QP NOS Name Field Technician
responsible for attending to customer
(Computing and
complaints, installing newly purchased
Peripherals)
products, troubleshooting system
NSQF Level 4
problems and, configuring hardware
equipment such as servers, storage and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
other related networking devices.
Code 7422
VOLUME II B 238
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Qualification Pack Details: responsible for rectifying faults in the
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q4606 smartphone brought in by the customer.
QP NOS Name Field Technician The individual receives the faulty
(Networking and Smartphone, diagnoses the problems,
Storage) performs front end or hardware level
NSQF Level 4 repair as required, resolves software
issues and ensures effective functioning
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: before delivering back to customer.
Code 7422
Qualification Pack Details:
Title Information and Communications
Technology Installers and Servicers QP NOS Reference ELE/Q8104
QP NOS Name Smartphone Repair
7422.2201 Technician
NSQF Level 4
Test and Repair Technician
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Test Repair Technician: Also called ‘IT
Code 7422
Repair Technician’, or ‘Hardware
Title Information and Communications
Technician’, the Test Repair Technician
Technology Installers and Servicers
diagnoses and performs rework and
repairs on the faulty module in the
7422.3001
hardware. The individual at work is
responsible for rectifying faults in the Tower Technician
faulty module in of the IT hardware
equipment brought in by the Field Tower Technician is responsible to
Technician. The individual receives the maintain site live24x7, maintain and
faulty module, diagnoses the problems, repair level-1 faults/issues at telecom
decides on the action to be taken, reworks tower site, level-1preventive and
and repairs on them. corrective maintenance and report faults
to the supervisor in time. Individual also
Qualification Pack Details: needs to travel inter-state and work
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q4602 during odd hours, when required.
QP NOS Name Test and Repair
Technician
NSQF Level 4 Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference TEL/Q4100
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: QP NOS Name Tower Technician
Code 7422 NSQF Level 4
Title Information and Communications
Technology Installers and Servicers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7422
7422.2301 Title Information and Communications
Smartphone Repair Technician Technology Installers and Servicers
7422.9900
Smartphone Repair Technician diagnoses
problems and repairs the faulty module of
the smartphone. The individual at work is
VOLUME II B 239
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Information and Communications tasting and grading food products and
Technology Installers and Servicers, beverages; treating and processing
natural fibres, skins and hides; making and
Other
repairing furniture and other goods made
of wood; preparing hides, skins and pelts
Information and Communications
for further use; making and repairing
Technology Installers and Servicers, Other
textiles, garments, hats, shoes and related
include installers and servicers who install,
products. Supervision of other workers
repair and maintain telecommunications
may be included.
equipment, data transmission equipment,
cables, antennae and conduits and repair,
Occupations in this Sub Division are
fit and maintain computers not elsewhere
classified into the following Groups:
classified.
751 Food Processing and Related Trade
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Workers
Code 7422
752 Wood Treaters, Cabinet-makers
Title Information and Communications
and Related Trades Workers
Technology Installers and Servicers
753 Garment and Related Trades
Workers
Sub Division 75
754 Other Craft and Related Workers
Food Processing, Woodworking,
Garment and Other Craft and
Group 751
Related Trades Workers
Food Processing and Related Trade
Workers
Food processing, wood working, garment
and other craft and related trades workers
treat and process agricultural and fisheries Food processing and related trades
raw materials into food and other workers slaughter animals, treat and
products, and produce and repair goods prepare them and related food items for
made of wood, textiles, fur, leather, or human and animal consumptions, make
other materials. various kinds of bread, cakes and other
The work is carried out by hand and by flour products, process and preserve fruit,
hand-powered and other tools which are vegetables and related foods, taste and
used to reduce the amount of physical grade various food products and
effort and time required for specific tasks, beverages, or prepare tobacco and make
as well as to improve the quality of the tobacco products.
products. The tasks call for an
understanding of the work organization, Occupations in this Group are classified
the materials and tools used, and the into the following Families:
nature and purpose of the final product.
Tasks performed by workers in this sub- 7511 Butchers, Fishmongers and Related
major group usually include: treating and Food Preparers
processing meat, fish, grain, fruit,
7512 Bakers, Pastry-Cooks and
vegetables and related materials into food
Confectionery Makers
stuffs, and tobacco into tobacco products;
7513 Dairy Products Makers
VOLUME II B 240
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7514 Fruits, Vegetables and Related Slaughterer
Preservers
7515 Food and Beverage Tasters and Slaughterer slaughters animals, flays and
Graders trims carcasses in readiness for meat
cutters. Kills or stuns animal; thrusts knife
7516 Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco
Products Makers
into jugular vein to drain off blood; flays
carcass, opens it and removes entrails;
cuts and dresses carcass and washes
Family 7511
down meat. May remove offal from
Butchers, Fishmongers and Related
carcasses and place carcasses in cold
Food Preparers storage rooms.
Butchers, fishmongers and related food ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
preparers slaughter animals, clean, cut Code 7511
and dress meat and fish, remove bones Title Butchers, Fishmongers and Related
and prepare related food items or Food Preparers
preserve meat, fish and other foods and
food products by drying, salting or 7511.0300
smoking.
Sausage Maker
7511.0100
Sausage Maker prepares ingredients for
Butcher sausages and operates sausage making
machine. Weighs out various meats,
Butcher slaughters animals, trims spices and other ingredients according to
carcasses and prepares standard meat formula and dumps them into mixing
cuts. Kills or stuns animal and thrusts knife machine. Chops, minces and mixes
into jugular vein to drain off blood; flays ingredients by machine as required. Feeds
carcass, opens it and removes entrails; sausage meat into machine and gathers
removes offal and washes down meat; sausage casing over machine spout. Starts
cuts and chops carcasses into standard machine to force meat into sausage
meat cuts and into smaller portions casing. Pinches and ties end of filled
according to customers' requirement. casing. Empties mixed ingredients into
May specialize in slaughtering particular containers. May grind meat. May fill
type of animal or in particular method of casings with bulk sausage. May be
slaughtering such as 'halal' or 'Jhatka'. designated according to kind of sausage
May perform one or more operations made.
such as FLAYER, SKINNER, MEAT DRESSER,
MEAT PROCESSOR and be designated ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
accordingly. Code 7511
Title Butchers, Fishmongers and Related
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Food Preparers
Code 7511
Title Butchers, Fishmongers and Related 7511.0400
Food Preparers Briner
7511.0200
VOLUME II B 241
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Briner immerses fresh fish fillets in brine performing precision functions involving
solution to condition them for wrapping the preparation of meat. Work may
or freezing: Places fish fillets in wire include specialized slaughtering tasks,
basket and submerges basket in salt and cutting standard or premium cuts of meat
water solution for specified time. for marketing, making sausage, or
Removes basket from brine tank and wrapping meats. Trims head meat and
dumps fillets on conveyor belt. otherwise severs or removes parts of
animals heads or skulls. Wraps dressed
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: carcasses and/or meat cuts. Trims, cleans,
Code 7511 and/or cures animal hides. Removes bone
Title Butchers, Fishmongers and Related and cuts meat into standard cuts to
Food Preparers prepare meat for marketing. Grinds meat
into sausage. Slaughters animals in
7511.0500 accordance with religious law and
determines that carcasses meet specified
Pickler (Meat Product)
religious standards when slaughtering is
performed for religious purposes. Slits
Pickler loads cuts of meat into pickling
open, eviscerates, and trims carcasses of
vats or barrels to cure meat preparatory
slaughtered animals. Cuts, trims, skins,
to smoking: Packs and arranges meat in
sorts, and washes viscera of slaughtered
vats or barrels by hand or with meat hook
animals to separate edible portions from
to ensure maximum saturation. Turns
offal. Washes and/or shaves carcasses.
valves to admit curing solution into vats or
Shackles hind legs of animals to raise
pours in solution by hand. Covers vat or
them for slaughtering or skinning.
barrel to keep meat protected and
submerged in solution. Sticks trier (hook)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
into meat and smells trier to determine
Code 7511
degree of curing. Opens valves or pulls
Title Butchers, Fishmongers and Related
bungs to drain vats and barrels, and
Food Preparers
removes cured meat for further
processing. Dumps frozen meat in water
7511.9900
tank to defrost it preparatory to curing.
May roll barrels to rearrange meat and Butchers, Fishmongers and Related
ensure maximum saturation. May flush or Food Preparers, Other
blow marrow from ham bones. May clean
vats with water and steam hoses. Butchers, Fishmongers and Related Food
Preparers, Other include all other workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: those who slaughter animals, kill fish,
Code 7511 clean, cut and dress meat and fish and
Title Butchers, Fishmongers and Related prepare related food items or preserve
Food Preparers meat, fish and other foods and food
products by drying, salting or smoking not
7511.0600 elsewhere classified.
Shactor
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7511
Shactor works in slaughtering, meat
packing, or wholesale establishments
VOLUME II B 242
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Butchers, Fishmongers and Related cakes. May develop new recipes for cakes
Food Preparers and icings.
Family 7512 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Bakers, Pastry-Cooks and Code 7512
Confectionery Makers Title Bakers, Pastry-Cooks and
Confectionery Makers
Bakers, pastry-cooks and confectionery
7512.0200
makers make various kinds of bread,
Mixing Machine Attendant
cakes, and other flour products, as well as
handmade chocolate and sugar
confectionery. Mixing Machine Attendant; Dough Mixer,
Machine (Bakery) mixes flour, water, milk,
sugar and other ingredients by machine
7512.0100
according to instructions or specified
Baker (Baking Products)
formula to make dough for cakes, biscuits,
wafer etc. Measures various ingredients
Baker (Baking Products); Confectioner
such as flour, sugar, water and milk in
(Flour Confectionery) mixes and bakes
required proportions and dumps them
ingredients according to recipes to
into mixing machine; turns knobs to set
produce breads, pastries, and other baked
mixing time and maintain temperature of
goods. Measures flour, sugar, milk, butter,
dough; starts machine; observes
shortening, and other ingredients to
operation of mixing and automatic
prepare batters, doughs, fillings and
formation of dough in machine; feels
icings, using scale and graduated
dough for desired consistency; stops
containers; dumps ingredients into mixing
machine and dumps dough into trough.
machine bowl or steam kettle to mix or
Pushes troughs of sponge dough into
cook them according to specifications;
room to ferment for specified time;
rolls, cuts, and shapes doughs to form
dumps raised sponged dough into mixer
sweet rolls, pie crust, tarts, cookies, and
and adds ingredients to complete mixer;
related products preparatory to baking;
records number of batches mixed. May be
places dough in greased or floured pans,
designated according to type of dough
moulds, or on sheets and bakes in oven or
mixed as BREAD DOUGH MIXER; PASTRY
on grill; controls temperature of oven by
MIXER; COOKIE MIXER.
regulating thermostats or by adjusting
dampers; checks progress of baking by
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
observing colour of products and noting
Code 7512
length of time in oven; removes baked
Title Bakers, Pastry-Cooks and
products and places them on cooling
Confectionery Makers
racks; applies glaze, icing, or other topping
to baked goods, using spatula or brush.
7512.0300
May specialize in making one or more
Oven Man (Bakery Products)
types of products such as breads, rolls,
pies, or cakes and be designated
accordingly as BAKER, BREAD; PASTRY Oven Man (Bakery Products) tends
MAKER; CAKE MAKER. May decorate stationary or rotary hearth oven that
bakes bread, pastries, and other bakery
VOLUME II B 243
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
products. Heats oven to required by observing colour of products and
temperature; places pans of unbaked noting length of time in oven; removes
goods on blade of long handled paddle; fried products and keeps them aside for a
opens oven door and slides leaded paddle cooling; prepares sugar syrup by boiling
into oven; jerks paddle from under pans sugar and water in prescribed proportion
to deposit them on hearth; regulates and to desired consistency; soaks products in
controls heat and humidity of oven by sugar syrup where required; applies silver
observing gauges, turning valves or other foils and other ingredient to make product
methods; notes colour of products during more presentable. May specialize in
baking to ensure uniformity of finished making one or more types of products
products; removes baked goods from such as Peda; Gulab Jamoon; Rasgola.
oven with paddle, and places them on May develop new recipes for sweets.
tiered racks for cooling, flips switch to
position hearth for loading and unloading ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
when tending rotary hearth oven. May Code 7512
prepare doughs and wrap papers. May be Title Bakers, Pastry-Cooks and
designated according to type of oven Confectionery Makers
tended as DRAWPLATE OVEN MAN; PEEL
OVEN MAN; ROTARY PEEL OVEN MAN. 7512.0500
Candy Maker
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7512
Candy Maker mixes together and cooks
Title Bakers, Pastry-Cooks and
candy ingredients by following, modifying
Confectionery Makers
or formulating recipes to produce product
of specified flavour, texture, and colour.
7512.0400
Cooks ingredients at specified
Sweet Meat Maker temperatures in open fire or steam-
jacketed kettles or in batch or continuous
Sweetmeat Maker; Halwai prepares one pressure cookers; caste candy by hand
or more kinds of Indian sweets by mixing using moulds and funnel, or tends
flour, sugar, milk, cream and other machine that caste candy in starch or
ingredients to form dough or paste rubber moulds; spreads candy into cooling
according to direction or formula and and heating slabs; kneads in machine-pulls
frying them in pans in desired forms and candy; spins or rolls candy into strips
shapes. Mixes ingredients such as flour, ready for cutting; examines, feels and
sugar, milk, ghee, nuts and water in tastes product to evaluate colour, texture,
required proportion according to and flavour; adds ingredient or modifies
instructions or formula; tastes and feels cooking and forming operations as
dough or paste for desired consistency; needed. May be designated according to
rolls, cuts and shapes dough to form type of candy produced as CARAMEL
sweet rolls and related products CANDY MAKER, COCONUT CANDY MAKER,
preparatory to frying; fills pan with TOFFEE CANDY.
required quantity of oil or ghee and places
pan on heated oven; places dough in pan ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to fry controlling temperature of oven Code 7512
regulating fire; checks progress of frying
VOLUME II B 244
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Bakers, Pastry-Cooks and by water for cutting and forming it into
Confectionery Makers candies of desired size and shape. Spreads
candy on iron plate table fitted with cold
7512.0600 water container at bottom; adds specified
Panman (Confectionery) amount of colouring and flavouring
agents; mixes ingredients until colouring
and flavouring are uniformly distributed;
Panman; Revolving Pan Operator; Coating
examines, feels and tastes product to
Machine Operator; Pan Operator
evaluate colour, texture, and flavour;
(Confectionery) operates steam heated
drains out hot water from container and
revolving pan to coat items such as candy,
replaces it with cold water to make
nuts and chewing gum tablets, with syrup,
cooling effective; hands over product to
wax colouring matter, or polish. Dumps
Machine man for further processing.
products into pan and starts pan
revolving; pours slowly specified quantity
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
of syrup over whirling candy or other
product and passes hands through batch Code 7512
to spread syrup uniformly; turns steam Title Bakers, Pastry-Cooks and
valve to heat pan and heat almonds, nuts Confectionery Makers
or other centres in pan; examines and
feels product to determine adequacy of 7512.0800
coating, and applies successive charges of Chocolate Maker
syrup until specified coating thickness is
attained; adds flavouring and colouring Chocolate Maker makes chocolate slabs or
ingredients in final coating as specified; bars grinding cocoa beans, heating
may mix together and apply emulsified or ingredients and forming slabs. Grinds
dry ingredients, such as gum solution, cracked cocoa beans in mill to reduce
corn starch, and powdered sugar to them to thick liquid or paste; presses
product. May transfer contents to cocoa-butter from ground beans, using
polishing pans and specified ingredients to hydraulic press, to obtain blocks of cocoa;
polishing coating. May set temperature grinds pressed flocks of cocoa to thick
controls and start blower to dry syrup. liquid; mixes liquid chocolate, sugar, and
May be designated according to product other ingredients in required proportions
coated or polished as ALMOND-PAN- to a dough like consistency in machine,
FINISHER; CHOCOLATE PEANUT PANMAN. feeds coarse mixed chocolate into
machine to convert it to flakes, heats
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: mixed flaked chocolate and cocoa-butter
Code 7512 in steam heated pans to desired texture
Title Bakers, Pastry-Cooks and and flavour to obtain chocolate bars or
Confectionery Makers slabs.
7512.0700 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Plate Worker, Confectionery Code 7512
Title Bakers, Pastry-Cooks and
Plate Worker, Confectionery prepares Confectionery Makers
syrup made by Cooker Operator by mixing
colour, flavour etc. on iron plate kept cool 7512.0900
VOLUME II B 245
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Conche Operator (Sugar and Observes temperature gauges and
Confectionery) increases or decreases steam pressure to
maintain constant temperature as mash
cooks. Pours yeast culture into cooked
Conche Operator (sugar and conf.)
mash and mixes mash with revolving
operates conche machine to heat and
blades. Stops revolving blades when mash
agitate refined chocolate mass with cocoa
and yeast are thoroughly mixed. Tests
butter to enrich colour, flavour, and
mash to determine temperature and
texture: Pumps specified amount of
specific gravity (proof), using
chocolate mixture into steam-heated
thermometer and hydrometer, and
stationary tank or rotary drum. Meters
records results. Observes gauges and
out specified amount of such ingredients
increases or decreases steam to ensure
as cocoa butter or flavourings. Turns
that mash ferments at constant
steam valves and adjusts thermostat to
temperature. Notifies Fermentation
heat contents of tank or drum to specified
Operator (beverage) when mash is ready
temperature. Pushes lever to start
to be pumped into fermentation tank.
agitators and rotate drum. Pushes levers
Removes sample of mash for laboratory
to change rate of agitation, drum rotation,
analysis.
and temperature, following specified time
cycles. Observes and tastes mixture to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
evaluate conformity to standard and
sends sample to laboratory for analysis. Code 7512
Adjusts temperature, agitation speed and Title Bakers, Pastry-Cooks and
timing cycle, and adds ingredients, such as Confectionery Makers
cocoa butter and lecithin, according to
laboratory findings. Pumps mixture to 7512.9900
storage tank. Bakers, Pastry Cooks and
Confectionery Makers, Other
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7512 Bakers, Pastry-cooks and Confectionery
Title Bakers, Pastry-Cooks and Makers, Other include all other workers
Confectionery Makers who perform variety of routine and low
skilled tasks in baking and confectionery
7512.1000 and may be designated according to
Yeast Maker (Beverage) nature of work performed such as: Helper
(Confectionery) assists in weighing, mixing
Yeast Maker controls equipment to of ingredients, heating them in steam or
prepare mixture of mash and yeast for use vacuum pans, adding flavour and colour to
in manufacture of distilled liquors: Weighs dough or paste, moulding, shaping,
specified quantities of rye and malt meal, cutting and wrapping of soft or hard stuff
depending upon amount of yeast for finished products. Bread Slicer slices
required, and dumps them into yeast tub bread using hand operated or power
(cooker) filled with specified amount of driven slicing machine Baker Helper helps
water. Opens valves to admit steam that baker by performing duties as kneading
circulates through coil pipes in tub and dough, cutting dough into desired sizes
cooks the mixture. Starts revolving blades removing baked products from oven. Mill
in tub to agitate mixture as it cooks. Room Hand (Chocolate) performs one or
VOLUME II B 246
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
more operations in chocolate making e.g., outlets; pours milk into separator;
grinding, refining, sieving as required. switches on centrifugal machine which
automatically carries milk into bowl and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: separates milk into fat and skimmed milk;
Code 7512 regulates separator to obtain required
Title Bakers, Pastry-Cooks and percentage of cream for making butter or
Confectionery Makers ghee; cleans plant using hot water, soda
and other detergent solutions. May also
attend to pasteurizing plant.
Family 7513 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7513
Dairy Products Makers Title Dairy Products Makers
7513.0300
Dairy products makers process butter and
various types of cheese, cream or other Butter Maker
dairy products.
Butter Maker performs all or several tasks
for making butter. Pasteurizes milk to
7513.0100
eliminate harmful bacteria. Separates
Dairy Worker, General
cream from milk in centrifuge. Adds lactic
ferment to ripen cream. Pours or pumps
Dairy Worker, General performs all or
cream into mechanical churn. Starts churn
several tasks in preparation of various
to make butter, controlling butter
dairy products. Pasteurises raw milk or
moisture, temperature and time of
other dairy product to remove harmful
churning. May add salt to butter in churn.
bacteria. Develops bacterial culture for
My take samples of butter for testing.
use in making butter, buttermilk, cheese
May boil and strain butter to make 'ghee'
and other products. Separates cream from
and be designated as GHEE MAKER
milk and churns it into butter. Curdles milk
and converts curds into cheese. May make
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ice-cream.
Code 7513
Title Dairy Products Makers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7513
7513.0400
Title Dairy Products Makers
Cheese Maker
7513.0200
Cheese Maker cooks milk and specified
Separator Man
ingredients to make cheese according to
formula. Pasteurizes and separates milk to
Separator Man; Cream Separator; Cream
obtain prescribed butter fat content; turns
man (Dairy) operates milk separator to
valves to fill vat with milk and heat milk to
separate cream from milk. Assembles and
specified temperature; starts agitator to
adjusts separator as necessary, according
mix ingredients; tests samples of milk for
to type of product for which separated
acidity and allows agitator to mix
cream or milk is to be used; places empty
ingredients until specified level of acidity
containers below cream and skimmed
is reached; dumps and mixes measured
VOLUME II B 247
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
amount of rennet into milk; stops agitator special shapes. May operate ice-block
to allow milk to coagulate into curd; cuts washing machine.
curd or separates curd with hand scoop to
release whey (watery part); observes ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
thermometer, adjusts steam valve, and Code 7513
starts agitator to stir and cook curd at Title Dairy Products Makers
prescribed temperature for specified
time; squeezes and stretches sample of
curd with figures and extends cooking
time to achieve desired firmness or 7513.9900
texture; scoops curd into burlap
Dairy Products Makers, Others
containers to drain off excess moisture;
places cheese in moulds and presses it
Dairy Workers (non-farm), Other include
into shape. May salt cheese by immersing
all other dairy workers not elsewhere
them in brine or roll cheese in dry salt,
classified, for example, those salting
pierce or smear cheese with cultured
cheese by immersing them in brine or by
wash to develop mould growth, and place
rubbing them with dry salt, sterilising
or turn cheese blocks on shelves to cure
milk; operating machines which
cheese. May supervise ripening of cheese.
homogenise milk, moulding butter or
May specialize in making particular type of
cheese into shape, packing and wrapping
cheese. May Pasteurise milk and operate
butter with paper, making condensed or
centrifugal machine to separate cream out
powdered milk, etc. and may be
of pure milk.
designated according to nature of work
performed.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7513
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Dairy Products Makers
Code 7513
Title Dairy Products Makers
7513.0500
Ice Cream Maker
Family 7514
Ice-Cream Maker makes ice-cream by
mixing milk, sugar and other ingredients
Fruits, Vegetables and Related
and by freezing mixture in freezing
Preservers
machine. Measures and mixes ingredients
according to recipe; pasteurises mixture
Fruit, vegetable and related preservers
to eliminate harmful bacteria; pumps
process or preserve fruit, nuts and related
ingredients through a homogeniser to
foods in various ways including cooking,
break-down butter-fat globules; pours
drying, salting, or juice or oil extraction.
mixture into freezing machine; starts
machine to stir and cool mixture; unloads
machine when ice-cream of required 7514.0100
consistency is obtained; cleans and Oil Expeller Man
sterilizes machines, and other equipment
with hot water. May form ice-cream into Oil Expeller Man; Oil Expeller Operator
tends machine that presses oil seeds, such
VOLUME II B 248
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
as cotton seed, copra, castor seed to removed; removes container when filled
extract oil. Feeds moistened oil seeds into with oil at delivery-end; replaces filled
hopper of machine; turns hand wheels to container with empty one; takes out oil
adjust rollers to flatten oil seed; turns cakes from hopper and fills it with another
control of heat drier to specified batch of oil seeds to maintain continuous
temperature and opens chute to admit production. May operate mechanical
flattened oil seed to drier; turns steam crusher for extracting oil from seeds.
valve of heat cooker to cook dried oils
seed; turns hand wheels to adjust roller ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
pressure of oil expeller; feels samples of Code 7514
expelled oil seed to determine that Title Fruits, Vegetables and Related
sufficient quantity of oil has been Preservers
removed; ensures that pressed seed cakes
are released at discharge end and that oil 7514.0300
flows into oil tank from peripheral surface
Grinder, Hand (Food Grain)
of expeller; stops machine when jammed
and makes necessary adjustments to
Grinder Hand (Food grain) grinds wheat,
maintain continuous, production keeps
pulses, spices or other food grains into
work place clean and tidy. May filter oil in
smaller pieces or powder, on hand
cloth-filter press.
operated grinding mill. Sets mill by
adjusting roller according to fineness of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
grinding desired; revolves roller of mill by
Code 7514
hand, feeding grains into hopper of mill at
Title Fruits, Vegetables and Related
regular intervals; examines crushed
Preservers
product periodically by feel of fingers and
adjusts roller as necessary. May shift grain
7514.0200
using mesh. May clean mill stones. May
Oil Crusher Operator, Animal take assistance of other grinder or helper
Driven in feeding mill.
Oil Crusher Operator, Animal Driven ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
operates animal driven crusher to extract Code 7514
oil from oil seeds, such as cotton seed, Title Fruits, Vegetables and Related
caster seed, groundnut, and copra. Places Preservers
empty container below crusher to collect
oil; harnesses bullocks, buffalo, camel to 7514.0400
crusher; feeds seeds into hopper of Pounder, Hand (Food Grain)
crusher in required quantity and drives
animal to start crusher; sprinkles
Pounder, Hand (Food grain) pounds grain
prescribed quantity of water over oil
or spices in iron, wooden or stone mortar
seeds for moistening them; adjusts
with pestle to remove bran from grain or
pressure between mortar (vessel or
to crush into smaller pieces or powder.
hopper) and pestle and ensures that oil is
Selects mortar and pestle according to
properly extracted. Examines oil cakes
type of food-grain or spices to be
visually or by feel of hand to determine
pounded. Puts requisite quantity of grain
that sufficient quantity of oil has been
or spices in mortar and pounds it with
VOLUME II B 249
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
pestle. Examines product periodically by Washing Machine Attendant; Cleaner
sight and touch and continues pounding (Food Grain) tends washing machine for
till product is crushed to desired fineness; washing and cleaning food grains
sifts product using sieve and re-crushes preparatory to milling or further
coarse residue to required fineness; processing. Starts machine; feeds machine
cleans equipment by hand. May weigh or with grain by hand or adjusts flow of grain
measure specified quantities of various from chute; regulates flow of water into
ground spices and mix them according to grain by manipulating lever; observes
formula for use. May pound grain to automatic washing of grain visually to
remove bran from grain using long ensure proper washing; may wash grains
wooden pestle. in tank filled with required quantity of
water and soaking it for a prescribed
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: period. May clean and oil machine.
Code 7514
Title Fruits, Vegetables and Related ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Preservers Code 7514
Title Fruits, Vegetables and Related
7514.0500 Preservers
Parcher (Food Grain)
7514.0700
Parcher (Food grain) roasts wheat, gram, Cook, General (Food Canning and
maize, peanuts and other food grains. Preserving)
Puts requisite quantity of sand in pan and
places pan on hot oven; allows sand to Cook, General (Food Canning and
heat up in pan; puts product in pan and Preserving), cook meat, fruits, vegetables
mixes it with hot sand for roasting using or other food according to recipes in large
long metal ladle; removes pan from oven quantities preparatory to canning or
when product is properly roasted; sifts preserving. Weighs or otherwise measures
roasted product from sand using sieve and ingredients, according to recipe; loads
allowing sand to fall in pan; collects ingredients into kettle or pressure cooker
product and repeats process till all food pans and frying machines, manually or by
grain is parched; maintains proper means of chute or conveyor; observes
temperature of oven by regulating fuel. thermometer and gauges, and turns valve
May prepare grain for roasting by soaking to admit steam to pressure cookers or
in water and then drying it. lights gas burner to heat and cook
contents of kettles; cooks ingredients
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: adding syrup, spices, sugar, colouring
Code 7514 matter or other substances as required;
Title Fruits, Vegetables and Related stirs mixture in kettle to blend and
Preservers prevent scorching of contents; drains off
cooked ingredients by opening valve at
7514.0600 bottom of vessel or by blowing material
Washing Machine Attendant, through drain with steam. May stir
contents with mechanical agitator. May
Cleaner (Food Grain)
test mixture with hydrometer or other
instrument to determine consistency. May
VOLUME II B 250
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
be designated according to type of food 7514.0900
product made, such as JAM MAKER; Cannery Worker (Can and
MARMALADE MAKER, etc.
Preservation)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Cannery Worker (Can and Preservation)
Code 7514
performs any combination of following
Title Fruits, Vegetables and Related
tasks to can, freeze, preserve, or pack
Preservers
food products. Dumps or places food
products in hopper, on sorting table, or on
7514.0800
conveyor. Sorts or grades products
Condiment Maker (Food Canning according to size, colour, or quality. Feeds
and Preserving) products into processing equipment, such
as washing, refrigerating, peeling, coring,
Condiment maker (Food Canning and pitting, trimming, grinding, dicing,
Preserving) makes various kinds of cooking, or slicing machines. Trims, peels,
chutneys, pickles and ketchup from and slices products with knife or paring
vegetables, fruit, fish, meat and spices tool. Feeds empty containers onto
using preservatives such as vinegar, salt, conveyor or forming machines. Fills
sugar, oil and other ingredients. Sorts and containers, using scoop or filling form, or
selects mature vegetables, fruits etc., packs by hand. Counts, weighs, or tallies
cleans product with water and discards processed items according to
decayed ones; cuts or chops product into specifications. Inspects and weighs filled
small pieces; mixes ingredients such as containers to ensure product conforms to
salt, vinegar or sugar in required quality and weight standards. Places filled
proportion in barrels, vats or jars containers on trays, racks, or into boxes.
according to formula to make pickling or Loads, moves, or stacks containers by
flavouring brine; dumps product such as hand or hand truck, and cleans glass jar
vegetables, fruit, fish or meat into solution containers, using air hose.
to soak or cook for specified time;
examines, feels, and tastes product to ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
evaluate colour and flavour; adds Code 7514
ingredients or modifies cooking and Title Fruits, Vegetables and Related
forming operations, as required. May cook Preservers
ingredients separately before mixing. May
pack product into containers in layers, 7514.1000
covering each layer with preservative Pickler (Can and Preservation)
compound. May specialize in making
particular type of condiment and be
Pickler (Can and Preservation) pickles
designated accordingly as PICKLE MAKER;
prepared food products in preservative or
CHUTNEY MAKER OR SAUCE MAKER.
flavouring solutions: Mixes ingredients,
such as salt, vinegar, or sugar in barrels,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
vats, or tanks, according to formula, to
Code 7514 make pickling or flavouring brine. Dumps
Title Fruits, Vegetables and Related product, such as vegetables, fruit, fish, fish
Preservers eggs, or meat into solution to soak for
specified time. May pack product into
VOLUME II B 251
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
barrels in layers, covering each layer with Grader examines, classifies and separates
preservative compound. May remove fruits, vegetables and fish according to
contents from containers by hand or with size, quality, colour, condition or species.
dip net. Washer tends machine that washes raw
fruits or vegetables preparatory to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: canning, freezing or packing. Feeder
Code 7514 Charger feeds machine with fruits or
Title Fruits, Vegetables and Related vegetables by hand for washing, shelling,
Preservers shredding, cooking and pulping.
7514.1100 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Preservative Filler, Machine (Can Code 7514
Title Fruits, Vegetables and Related
and Preservation)
Preservers
Preservative Filler, Machine (Can. and
Preservation) tends machine that
Family 7515
automatically dispenses brine, oil, salt, or
Food and Beverage Tasters and
syrup into containers of food products
prior to lidding or capping: Starts machine Graders
and turns valves to allow flow of solution.
Feeds or guides containers onto conveyor Food and beverage tasters and graders
that carries containers under dispensing inspect, taste and grade various types of
nozzles. Observes filling operation and agricultural products, food and beverages.
adjusts flow of solution or material to
optimum volume. Removes broken jars
7515.0100
from conveyor and deposits jars in waste
Tea Taster
receptacles. May fill machine reservoirs
with dry salt, oil, brine, or sugar solution
Tea Taster tastes sample of brewed tea to
as required.
determined quality and grade and
suggests proportions of different grade to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
be, blended according to market
Code 7514
requirement. Cooks or brews small
Title Fruits, Vegetables and Related
quantities of cured tea leaves in required
Preservers
quantity of water heated to specified
temperature, checks moisture contents or
7514.9900
samples, using Moisture Meter; infuses
Fruits, Vegetables and Related
different samples of tea in cups in tea
Preservers, Others tasting room; examines and tastes
different infusion for colour, density,
Fruit and Vegetable Preservers, other aroma and flavour to determined grade,
perform variety of routine tasks in canning approximate market value, or
and preserving food, fruits and vegetables acceptability to consumer taste; writes
not elsewhere classified, and may be blending formulas for guidance of workers
designated according to nature of work who prepare products in commercial
performed such as: Peeler Hand peels skin quantities. Keeps record of different
of fruits and vegetables using hand knife. grades of tea; visits factory to ensure
VOLUME II B 252
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
correct processing. Is designated as Title Food and Beverage Tasters and
COFFEE TASTER if engaged in tasting Graders
coffee. May meet buyers of tea.
7515.0400
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Grader, Meat
Code 7515
Title Food and Beverage Tasters and Grader, Meat examines animal carcasses
Graders to determine grade in terms of sales
value: Examines carcasses suspended
7515.0200 from stationary hooks or hooks attached
Liquor Taster to overhead conveyor to determine grade
based on age, sex, shape, thickness of
Liquor Taster tastes sample of liquor to meat, quantity and distribution of fat,
classify it according to standards. Tastes colour, texture, and marbling of lean
samples of liquor and ascertains and meat. Attaches grade identification tag to
judges such qualities as flavour, aroma carcass. May estimate weight of carcass or
and colour of liquor by use of his senses. observe dial of automatic weighing scale
Classifies samples according to system of to determine weight of carcass.
standard and recommends specific blends
of lots that will be accepted commercially. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
May be required to ascertain place of Code 7515
origin and age of wine or liquor. Title Food and Beverage Tasters and
Graders
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7515 7515.9900
Title Food and Beverage Tasters and Food and Beverage Tasters and
Graders Graders, Other
7515.0300
Food and Beverages Tasters and Graders,
Taster (Food) Other include workers who inspect, taste
and grade various types of agricultural
Taster (Food) tastes samples of food or products, food and beverages not
beverages to determine palatability of elsewhere classified.
product or to prepare blending formulas:
Cooks or brews small lots of beverages or ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
other food products and tastes product to Code 7515
determine grade, approximate market Title Food and
value, or acceptability to consumer tastes. Beverage Tasters and Graders
Writes blending formulas for guidance of
workers who prepare food products in
commercial quantities. May purchase
Family 7516
food products.
Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Products Makers
Code 7515
VOLUME II B 253
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Tobacco preparers and tobacco products conditioning prior to further processing.
makers prepare tobacco leaves and make May remove stems.
various tobacco products.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7516.0100 Code 7516
Tobacco Curer Title Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco
Products Makers
Tobacco Curer drives green tobacco
7516.0300
leaves in heated tobacco barns. Suspends
bunches of green tobacco leaves on Blender, Tobacco
strings in barn; heats barn by lighting fire
inside furnace, to required temperature; Blender, Tobacco mixes various grades
regulates temperature and draught and kinds of tobacco leaves in accordance
controls, depending on type of tobacco with formula to form blend of distinctive
and weather conditions, until leaves are flavour. Removes leaves of tobacco from
yellowed; opens barns door periodically to each of several bundles of tobacco leaves;
examine colour and moisture content of spreads leaves on trays and picks out
leaves to determine when to increase those unsuitable for desired blend; weighs
heat and regulate draught controls to dry out quantities of each kind of leave
leaves and stems to desired quality and according to formula and mixes them
colour; removes dried and cured tobacco together. May spray tobacco with oils,
from barn and piles them separately for cloves, and other spices and kneads
storing. May cure and dry green tobacco tobacco to blend in flavouring.
leaves in open sun.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7516
Code 7516 Title Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco
Title Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco Products Makers
Products Makers
7516.0400
7516.0200
Conditioner, Tobacco
Tobacco Grader
Conditioner, Tobacco treats tobacco
Tobacco Grader; Tobacco Sorter grades leaves by moistening them with water or
cured tobacco leaves according to colour, steam to make them pliable for further
texture, size etc. of leaf preparatory to processing. Moistens leaves by dipping
marketing or processing into tobacco them in or spraying them with water,
products. Spreads cured and dried leaves stacks leaves on drain board, covers them
on table; picks up leaves one by one and with hessian or other cloth and allows
examines, feels and smells and them to absorb moisture for a specified
determines grade according to size, time; or feeds leaves into steam heated
colour, extent of damage, texture and conditioning machine, observes gauzes,
aroma; strips defective portions from maintains appropriate steam pressure and
leaves; stacks the leaves into piles allows leaves to absorb steam for
according to grade and keeps record of specified time. May mix or blend several
graded tobacco. May recommend grades and types of tobacco and condition
VOLUME II B 254
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
it for processing. May specialize in cheroots by performing various simple
conditioning a particular kind of tobacco operations such as removing mid-rib,
leaf and be designated accordingly. stalks from tobacco leaves, cutting ends of
cigars or cheroots to make them into
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: uniform size, and labelling them with
Code 7516 trade bands. Collects tobacco leaves,
Title Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco soaks them in water to soften; takes out
Products Makers moistened leaf, cuts and strips midrib and
stalk avoiding damage to leaf; stacks
7516.0500 stripped leaves in piles keeping right and
left halves separate; its broad leaves into
Cigar or Cheroot Roller
rolls for use as roller leaf; cuts short leaves
by hand scissors into small pieces for use
Cigar or Cheroot Roller; Cigar or Cheroot
as fillers for cigar or cheroot; cuts cigar or
Maker makes cigars and cheroots from
cheroot ends with hand scissors to make
tobacco leaves by hand. Dries in sun
them uniform of size; pastes
tobacco leaves soaked in jaggery solution.
manufacturer's label at one end of cigar or
Removes rib and stalk from dried tobacco
cheroot. May stack tobacco for curing and
leave. Sorts out suitable leaves for
drying. May roll or make cigar or cheroot.
binding. Cuts filler tobacco leaves
May pack finished cigars or cheroots in
according to size and shape of cigar or
boxes.
cheroot to be made. Binds by hand filler
leaves with binding leaf giving required
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
shape of cigar or cheroot and pastes end
Code 7516
of binding leaf. Rolls cigar or cheroot on
Title Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco
slab or stone or hand surface giving
Products Makers
necessary pressure with hands to obtain
smooth roundness. Selects suitable
7516.0700
tobacco leaf for wrapping (superior
quality imported thin tobacco leaf). Cuts Bidi Maker
wrapping leaf according to size and shape
of cigar or cheroot by scissors and wraps it Bidi Maker; Bidi Roller makes bidis by
on cigar or cheroot giving it final shape hand by rolling shredded tobacco in bidi
and smooth finish. Cuts cigar or cheroot leaves. Collects required quantity of
ends to obtain uniformity in size, using shredded tobacco and bidi leaves; soaks
scissors or knife. bidi leaves in water to moisten to make
them pliable; cuts them into pieces
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: according to size of bidi to be made using
Code 7516 tin stencil or plate and hand scissors; puts
Title Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco measured quantity of tobacco filling on
Products Makers cut leaf and rolls it with fingers to make
bidi of desired size and shape (conical)
7516.0600 closing broader open end and pressing
conical end flat; ties piece of thread round
Cigar or Cheroot Roller Helper
rolled bidi to hold tight leaf and tobacco
filling; checks visually whether bidis are of
Cigar or Cheroot Roller Helper assists
uniform size; ties finished bidis into
Cigar or Cheroot Roller in making cigars or
VOLUME II B 255
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
bundles of twenty-five, fifty etc. as removed for further processing. May roll
required; places bidi bundles in trays or bidis and wrap and pack small specified
baskets and delivers finished bidis to Bidi quantities of ready bidis in different types
Checker. and sizes of paper packages, and then
pack small bundles into bigger ones; and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: be designated as BIDI PACKER. May also
Code 7516 heat raw bidis in furnace to required
Title Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco standard of heat.
Products Makers
7516.0800 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Furnace Man, Bidi Code 7516
Title Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco
Products Makers
Furnace Man, Bidi bakes bidis in heated
furnace to remove moisture and
7516.1000
dampness. Heats furnace by lighting
firewood in fire chamber; removes hot Snuff Maker
cinders and ash from fire chamber when
furnace attains desired temperature; Snuff Maker makes snuff tobacco by
paces steel tray containing bidis on long grinding and blending various types of
handle wooden ladle; pushes wooden tobacco. Places tobacco leaves, stalks and
ladle with trays inside furnace and stacks chopped tobacco in a bin, adds salt
trays on furnace bed; closes furnace door solution and allows mixture to ferment for
and allows bidis to bake for specified specified period of time; watches
period; removes baked bidis from furnace fermentation, turning mixture
and examines them to ensure proper occasionally; roasts fermented tobacco on
baking. heated mud pan and pulverises it to flour-
like consistency in a grinding machine or
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: mortar using pestle; sifts snuff flour
Code 7516 through fine mesh-wire or cloth screens;
Title Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco blends various types of snuff according to
Products Makers formula, and adds aromatic oils or
essences to obtain desired flavour. May
7516.0900 specialize in a particular snuff making
process such as fermenting, grinding,
Bidi Checker
sifting or blending and be designated
accordingly.
Bidi Checker; Bidi Counter checks quality
and number of bidis packed in bundles to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
maintain manufacturing standard.
Code 7516
Examines bidi bundles to ensure proper
Title Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco
filling and rolling of bidis and appropriate
Products Makers
number of bidis in bundle. Sorts out
improperly filled or rolled, broken or
7516.1100
otherwise defective bidis from good ones;
checks samples to ensure quality and Chewing Tobacco Maker
quantity of tobacco filling. Places checked
bundles on trays or in baskets to be
VOLUME II B 256
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Chewing Tobacco Maker; 'Zarda' Maker boards, plywood, veneers and similar
makes chewing tobacco from tobacco wood products; and make, decorate and
leaves. Collects required type of tobacco repair wooden furniture, vehicles and
leaves and dries them in sun for a other wooden products. They use
specified period for proper conditioning; specialized hand tools and set-up, operate
pounds dried leaves in a mortar using and tend wood processing and
wooden pestle to reduce them into small woodworking equipment, machines and
pieces of required size; dyes broken leaves machine tools.
with edible chemicals and dries them in
sun; treats pounded tobacco with spices Occupations in this Group are classified
and similar ingredients in accordance with into the following Families:
formula and adds scented solution or
essence to form blend of distinctive 7521 Wood Treaters
flavour. May specialize in making
7522 Cabinet Makers and Related
particular kind of chewing tobacco such as
Workers
Banarasi, Moradabadi, Zafrani or Mohini.
7523 Wood Working Machine Tool
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Setters and Operators
Code 7516
Title Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco
Family 7521
Products Makers
Wood Treaters
7516.9900
Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco Wood treaters operate and tend wood
treatment processing equipment and
Products Makers, Other
machines to remove bark from logs,
produce wood chips, season, preserve and
Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco Products
treat wood, and produce wafer boards,
Makers, Other include workers who
particleboards, hardboards, insulation
prepare tobacco leaves and make various
boards, plywood, veneers and similar
tobacco products not elsewhere classified.
wood products.
7521.0100
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Kiln Operator, Wood
Code 7516
Title Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco
Products Makers Kiln Operator, Wood operates steam kiln
for seasoning or drying wood to specified
moisture content. Feeds water into boiler
Group 752 and lights fire in boiler fire-box. Directs
workers to load and place lumber in kiln
Wood Treaters, Cabinet-makers and ascertains moisture content of wood
at various locations in kiln by moisture
and Related Trades Workers
metre or by sawing and weighing samples
of wood before and after drying. Waits till
Wood treaters, cabinet-makers and
boiler acquires sufficient heat, plans
related trades workers preserve and treat
drying cycle according to moisture
wood; produce wafer boards,
content, dimensions and species of wood
particleboards, hardboards, insulation
VOLUME II B 257
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
and adjusts valve to release and regulate Title Wood Treaters
flow of steam into kiln. Starts water pump
to feed additional water into boiler and 7521.0300
sets automatic controls to regulate kiln Wood Bender
temperature and humidity for specified
time. Switches on fans inside kiln and gets
Wood Bender bends wooden parts to
kiln doors closed to make it air-tight.
required shape by steaming, heating,
Records humidity and kiln temperature
softening and drying. Steams wooden
and controls valves to regulate steam
parts or heats them in boiling water to
supply while maintaining balance
make them soft and pliable. Bends
between temperatures and moisture
steamed or heated parts gradually by
content to avoid damage to wood. Keeps
hand into shape or places them in
lumber in kiln for specified period. Opens
manually operated press to obtain desired
kiln on completion of drying cycle, verifies
curvature. Fastens parts into place or
moisture content of wood and directs
keeps them in sun to dry and set in
workers to remove lumber from kiln when
permanent shape. May maintain
dried. May work simultaneously as Boiler
continuous application of steam to ensure
Attendant. May attend to other work
pliability while pressing to shape.
when kiln is not working.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7521
Code 7521
Title Wood Treaters
Title Wood Treaters
7521.0400
7521.0200
Wood Treater
Impregnator, Wood
Wood Treater treat underground portion
Impregnator, Wood treats wood with
of transmission poles with chemical
chemical to protect it against decay or
preservative after installation: Digs
parasites. Mixes chemicals in prescribed
around base of pole to expose area
ratio in open tanks or vats, heats it to
susceptible to decay, using pick and
required temperature and checks its
shovel. Scrapes dirt and other residue
strength. Assesses moisture content of
from pole surface and chips away decayed
wood and gets it dried, if necessary, to
wood, using hand tools. Paints dressed
prescribed standard. Dips wood products
area with preservative solution, using
in tank manually or using crane, rods etc.
brush. Wraps treated portion of pole with
as necessary. Controls temperature of
waterproof paper, fastening paper with
solution, determines amount of
hand stapler. Refills hole and packs earth
impregnation and keeps them (wood
firmly around base of pole, using shovel.
products) immersed in preservative
solution for prescribed period. May brush,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
paint or inject preservative on wood or
Code 7521
treat it with gas.
Title Wood Treaters
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7521.0500
Code 7521
Grader (Wood Working)
VOLUME II B 258
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
furniture, carts and other vehicles,
Grader (woodworking) inspects and wheels, parts, fittings, patterns, models
grades milled, rough-sawed, or and other wooden products using
dimensional stock lumber according to woodworking machines, machine tools
standards: Examines lumber on table, and specialized hand tools.
moving belt, chain conveyor, or in racks
for defects, such as knots, stains, decay, 7522.0100
splits, faulty edges, pitch pockets,
Furniture Maker, Wood
wormholes, and defective milling. Grades
lumber, using calliper rule, to ensure
Furniture Maker, Wood makes and repairs
specified dimensions. Marks lumber to
chairs, tables, benches, desks, shelves
indicate grade and processing
etc., by common carpentry processes
instructions, using marker. Tallies pieces
using hand and or power tools or both.
of lumber according to grade and board
Studies drawing or sample, calculates
footage. May determine cuts to be made
sizes and quantity of timber required.
to obtain highest marketable value from
Prepares patterns of different parts of
material. May remove unsatisfactory
article to be made on card board. Marks
pieces from conveyor or table and place
off pieces using patterns, square, pencil,
pieces on stacks, in bins, or on carts. May
rule or scriber and saws and shapes them
scale board footage, using calibrated scale
according to specifications by sawing,
on lumber ruler, and record results.
planning, drilling etc. Marks and makes,
necessary joints such as dove-tail, Tenon-
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
mortise, lap etc. Checks dimensions and
Code 7521
fitting of joints frequently. Fixes hinges,
Title Wood Treaters
hooks etc., at required places. Assembles
different parts and fits them permanently
7521.9900
by gluing, drilling, dowelling, nailing
Wood Treaters, Other screwing etc., as necessary. Fills up
superfluous holes etc., with putty;
Wood Treaters, other include all other smoothens surface using sand paper,
wood treaters engaged in forming and earth (yellow) and files. Checks completed
preserving wood by application of heat, articles and ensures correct fitting, rigidity
seasoning and chemical treatment, not and finish. Sharpens his own tools. May
elsewhere classified. polish or paint articles made.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7521 Code 7522
Title Wood Treaters Title Cabinet Makers and Related
Workers
Family 7522
7522.0200
Cabinet Makers and Related Cabinet Maker
Workers
Cabinet Maker makes high class wooden
Cabinet-makers and related workers furniture such as ward-robes, dressing
make, decorate and repair wooden tables, sofa sets, radio cabinets etc.,
VOLUME II B 259
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
according to design or specification using according to drawing and other
power or hand tools or both. Studies specifications. Fits longitudinal runners,
drawing or samples. Selects timber and cross barriers, vertical posts etc. and
calculates quantity required. Marks cuts tightens frame rigidly to chassis. Fits
and shapes oversize pieces to required assembled or welded metal frame over
dimensions by sawing, planing, etc. Makes wooden longitudinal runners and cross-
necessary joints such as dove-tail, tenon- members and assembles metal panel, roof
mortise, half lap etc. Checks joints covers, doors, etc., to wooden frame using
frequently and finishes them ensuring nuts and bolts, etc., to wooden
firmness and correct fitting. Assembles attachments such as fasteners, handles,
parts for trial, rectifies defects if any and hooks, lockers, etc., to frame or body as
then dismantles them for further work. required. May fix interior fittings and
Finishes inside portions, which cannot be repair or replace parts. May specialize in
worked after assembling and smoothens building any particular type of coach such
outer portions using plane, shaver (tools) as ambulance vans, passenger buses,
etc. Applies glue in joints and re- army vehicles, goods lorries etc.
assembles parts step by step, securing
joints with dowels (wooden or bamboo ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
pins), screws or nails as required. Fixes Code 7522
hinges, brackets etc. where necessary. Title Cabinet Makers and Related
Finishes outer surface by filling holes and Workers
cracks with putty and using different
grades of sand papers to ensure better 7522.0700
polish. Sharpens his own tools. May fix
Coach Builder, Railway
metal or other fittings on furniture body.
May also polish and varnish furniture.
Coach Builder, Railway constructs and
repairs wooden bodies of railway coaches,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
using hand and power tools. Studies
Code 7522
sketches or diagram for design of body to
Title Cabinet Makers and Related
be constructed. Estimates and collects
Workers
timber pieces of required quantity and
sizes. Cuts and shapes wood to required
7522.0600
shape and sizes, using chisel, planer, saw
Body Builder, Automobile and other hand tools or gets them cut
over power driven machines according to
Body Builder, Automobile constructs rigid drawing and other specifications. Fits and
body on auto-chassis with or without assembles various parts on chassis or
super-structure using wood and metal frame of coach. Lays or fixes floor, sides,
frames for passenger buses, goods trucks, roof, wooden panels, board, etc. and
lorries, vans, etc. Studies sketches or blue secures them tightly to frame with screws,
print regarding type of body to be built. pop rivets, bolts and nuts. Replaces
Selects required sizes of timber pieces and broken, damaged or worn out wooden
collects finished metal parts. Cuts and parts for panels of railway coach with new
shapes wood for body using hand or ones and fixes fasteners, fittings, latches,
power tools. Builds frame work, lining, glass on doors and windows etc. as
floors, ceiling and other wooden parts required. May apply wax, French polish or
VOLUME II B 260
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
shellac to wooden surface as protective type and quality of wood and position sit
coat of paint. May engrave or carve on table or floor according to
decorative or ornamental designs on convenience. Measures wood and marks
wooden panels. guide lines and reference points according
to prescribed specifications using foot
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: rule, scriber, callipers etc. Avoids wastage
Code 7522 and ensures convenience of sawing,
Title Cabinet Makers and Related cutting etc. while marking. May saw
Workers lumber to facilitate marking.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7522.0800
Code 7522
Body Builder, Other Vehicles
Title Cabinet Makers and Related
Workers
Body Builder, Other Vehicles assembles
and repairs wooden parts of vehicle body
7522.1000
on metal frame with specified seating and
Pattern Marker, Wood
other arrangements and screws Masonite,
wooden planks, hard boards, plywood
etc., according to specifications for Pattern Maker, Wood makes and repairs
constructing bodies of vehicles not wooden patterns from drawings or
elsewhere classified such as cycle samples for making moulds to cast metals
rickshaw, auto-rickshaw etc. (excluded are using hand or power tools or both. Studies
CART BUILDERS AND WHEEL WRIGHTS). drawings or sample, calculates sizes and
Takes exact measurements of metal body quantity of timber required. Selects right
for cutting required sizes of wooden parts. type of timber for making pattern. Saws,
Cuts wooden plank, Masonite or hard adzes and planes oversize pieces to
board to required sizes using hand saw required size and marks them with
and drills holes with hand drill. Fits cut shrinkage allowance, using construction
pieces of plank, or board over metal frame scale callipers, divider, pencil, scriber etc.
and secures them tightly with bolts and Drills holes and fixes dowels for
nuts, or screws as required. May fit assembling detachable parts and screws
cushions, seats, arms rests and hoods to or nails other pieces permanently as
rickshaws. necessary. Builds up undersized portions
by nailing or screwing card board,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: plywood, thin pieces of wood or by
applying putty as required. Assembles
Code 7522
completed pattern, checks measurements
Title Cabinet Makers and Related
and rectifies defects if any. Fills
Workers
superfluous holes with molten sealing wax
or with any other filling. Smoothens
7522.0900
surface by filling or with sand paper for
Wood Marker
better finish. Sharpens his own tools. May
Wood Marker marks wood with pencil,
apply preservative coating of solution of
scriber, chalk, etc. according to sample or
shellac and spirit or any other water proof
drawing for further operations. Studies
paint.
drawings and specifications or collects
cutting list for marking. Selects required
VOLUME II B 261
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7522 Wood Carver, Hand carves floral and
Title Cabinet Makers and Related artistic designs on wooden surfaces for
Workers decorative purposes using fine chisels and
hand tools. Studies sketches and
dimensions of ornamental designs to be
7522.1100
carved. Finishes and smoothens required
Cooper
portion of wood surface, visualises
finished product and transfers design on
Cooper; Tank or Barrel Maker makes or
wood surface by tracing over drawing and
repairs wooden tanks, barrels etc., using
carbon paper with pencil or stylers.
hand or power tools or both for storing
Clamps furniture part or wood piece in
and transporting liquids such as spirits,
vice and roughs out design by cutting
beer, etc. Studies drawing or sample and
along marked lines on wood using chisels
selects required type of planks. Saws and
and mallet. Selects carving chisels,
planes staves (wooden strips) according to
gravers, gauges, files etc. and determines
size and capacity of cask to be made.
sequence of their use according to
Makes suitable water tight joints along
intricacy of design. Cuts, trims or touches
sides and at both ends of staves by power
up roughed out design to desired finish
or hand tools. Assembles staves into
using hand tools. Taps stippling tool with
tabular form along joints made. Prepares
mallet to stipple design (dotted work).
two rings of iron strip of required size by
Verifies dimensions of carving with foot
heating iron strip in furnace, bending it to
rule and dividers and makes modifications
circular shape by hammering and riveting
if necessary. Makes holes to provide for
both ends. Heats carefully one end of
inlay work, if necessary, and smoothens
assembled staves by fire to make wood
carved designs by rubbing with sand
pliable. Hammers one hoop on to heated
papers of different grades. May polish
end till staves bend to shape. Repeats
finished article. May draw full size design
process at other end to fix other hoop.
from sample or imagination for tracing on
Prepares top and bottom lids by sawing,
wood. May design and sharpen carving
planing and shaping wooden planks into
tools.
form of circular disc. Seals one end of cask
permanently by fixing lid in grooves.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Applies lacquer to joints to prevent
Code 7522
leakage and polishes casks with wood
Title Cabinet Makers and Related
polish. Repairs defective casks by
Workers
replacing broken staves and hoopes and
seaming leaking joints. Sharpens his own
7522.1300
tools.
Inlayer, Wood
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Inlayer, Wood inlays metal, hardwood,
Code 7522
ivory, precious stone and like material in
Title Cabinet Makers and Related
furniture, board, door etc. for decorative
Workers
purposes. Studies sample or design for
inlaying. Draws or traces designs on
7522.1200
articles to be decorated. Cuts depressions
Wood Carver, Hand
VOLUME II B 262
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
in markings and scoops wood from places polishes it on completion. May paint or
where inlaying is to be done, using lacquer finished toy.
specially designed chisels. Selects material
to be inlayed, marks it out to design, if any ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and cuts, shapes smoothens and sizes Code 7522
pieces as necessary with feet saw, planer, Title Cabinet Makers and Related
chisel sand paper, etc. Applies glue or Workers
specific adhesive and inserts inlaying 7522.1500
pieces in respective depressions, ensuring
Pith Worker, Wood
to fill up gaps if any in scooped portions
with saw dust, colour etc. to ensure
Pith Worker, Wood prepares models,
permanent adherence of inlaid pieces in
figures and toys from pith (soft wood)
position. Files, planes and scrapes whole
using small hand tools. Soaks pith in water
surface to smooth finish. May keep inlaid
for required period to soften it. Washes,
plank under hand operated nipping press
removes dirt and saline content from
for about twelve hours to secure inlaid
soaked pith, squeezes out excess water
pieces in position. May polish inlaid article
and dries it on platform. Powders dried
to high finish. May sharpen inlaying tools.
pith in flour mill or otherwise and strains
or sieves powder with hand strainer.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Mixes pith powder with other ingredients
Code 7522
like saw dust, powder of special type of
Title Cabinet Makers and Related
bark, gum etc. in required proportions and
Workers
mixes them thoroughly by tramping or
kneading into dough. Spreads dough on
7522.1400
table to form sheets of clay in required
Toy Maker, Wood thickness. Cuts and puts sheets of clay
required moulds, presses it to give shape
Toy Maker, Wood makes wooden toys of to different forms and ties all parts of
various shapes and sizes according to mould according to shape with string. Fills
drawings or specifications using hand and in hollow spaces with waste paper for
power tools, fret saw machine etc. Studies strength, removes mould after some time
drawing or sample and traces design on and dries figure in shade. Removes waste
material or marks wooden block according paper, gives final touch to form with fine
to type of toy to be made. Cuts, shapes, chisel and smoothens it with sand paper.
turns and performs other operations Applies colour, paint, wax and plastic
according to tracing or marking using fret coating etc. as necessary to make it
saw, hand saw, adz, chisels etc. as waterproof and effect natural look. May
necessary. Frequently measuring it with make toys directly from soaked pith by
callipers and rule to ensure conformity pressing it in mould and shaping with
with required specifications. Drills holes small hand tools. May make different
where necessary and assembles different components or limbs of toys separately
parts with nails, wires etc. or glues them and then join them with twine or fine
together as specified. Smoothens finished wire.
toy or its components before assembling
with different grades of sand paper and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7522
VOLUME II B 263
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Cabinet Makers and Related ash wood, willow wood, mulberry wood
Workers etc. and marks it. Shapes stock to
specified size and dimensions by sawing,
7522.1600 planing, carving, turning, etc. as necessary
Picture Frame Maker and bends it to required shape by
steaming, softening and pressing. Cuts
plies to size, files and fixes them and puts
Picture Frame Maker makes picture or
them in frame by screwing for treating
photo frames from soft wood by sawing,
and pressing, if engaged in making tennis
planing, shaping etc. using power and
or badminton rackets. Assembles
hand tools. Cuts wooden planks or slides
component parts of article by wedging,
into long thin strips with power or hand
bonding, clamping, nailing or screwing
saw and planes, shapes and sizes them to
them together. Aligns and balances it,
required thickness, form etc. using power
smoothens and covers surface of product
and hand tools according to frame design.
and attaches fixtures such as strings,
Marks frame strip to suit length and width
ferrules, grips etc. May varnish or paint
of picture or photo to be framed, places it
finished articles and repair damaged
in mitre box (sawing jig) and cuts it
equipment.
according to markings at 45 degrees
angle. Planes rebate (groove) on back side
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
of cut strips with side planer and
determines location, size and angle of nail Code 7522
holes to be drilled. Drills partial holes in Title Cabinet Makers and Related
one end of each piece, applies glue at Workers
mitered ends and assembles frame
together by holding sized pieces in vice 7522.1900
and driving nails through drilled holes. Wood Lacquerer
Smoothens frame to required finish by
rubbing with sand paper. May polish Wood Lacquerer lacquers and polishes
frame. May set leather, velvet or other small wooden articles such as toys, artistic
material in frame. May set glass, hard material, etc. on wood working lathe by
board etc. and mount picture in frame. applying and spreading lacquer (coating)
on them and then polishing them to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: required finish. Fixes toy concentrically
Code 7522 between centres or otherwise in lathe and
Title Cabinet Makers and Related rotates it either by power or manually
Workers with one hand using bow according to
type of lathe used. Marks portions of
7522.1800 article to suit colour design. Presses
Sports Goods Maker, Wood lacquer sticks of respective colours as per
colour design on rotating surface of article
and spreads it evenly on its body with
Sports Goods Maker, Wood makes sports
palm or date leaves according to
goods such as tennis rackets, cricket bats,
markings. Rubs lacquered article while in
hockey sticks, wickets and such other
motion with polishing cloth, felt etc. and
sports accessories from special type of
polishes it to high finish. May prepare
wood using power and hand tools. Selects
coloured lac by mixing and boiling pure lac
wood according to requirements such as
VOLUME II B 264
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
and coloured powder with water. May do Paper Board Makers, Other perform
wood turning. various tasks connected with paper board
making such as coating paper board with
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: wax, making water proof paper board,
Code 7522 card board, for use as parts of vehicle,
Title Cabinet Makers and Related fittings and fixtures etc.
Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7522.2000 Code 7522
Wood Polisher Title Cabinet Makers and Related
Workers
Wood Polisher cleans, smoothens and
7522.9900
polishes furniture and other
manufactured wooden articles to required Cabinet Makers and Related
shade and finish using sand paper, filler, Workers, Other
polishing compound, etc. Cleans furniture
piece or article to be polished with Cabinet Makers and Related Workers,
chemical or sand paper. Fills joints, knots Other includes all other workers in
holes etc. with putty or plaster and carpentry joinery, knot plugging, cabinet
finishes surface by filing, scraping and making etc. not elsewhere classified such
rubbing with sand paper. Prepares ground as those engaged in making walking sticks,
(base) by applying filler or staining pencils, pen holders etc.
(coating with special coloured material) as
required and refinishes surface with sand
paper. Applies polish on finished surface ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
using soft cloth or cotton and rubs it with
Code 7522
fine sand paper, soft cloth or polishing
Title Cabinet Makers and Related
leather to secure desired gloss and finish.
Workers
Ensures uniform finish everywhere of
furniture or article polished. May repeat
Family 7523
process number of times to ensure
Wood Working Machine Tool
desired finish. May use wood pillar or
Setters and Operators
chalk powder along with French polish for
polishing costly articles. May paint cane
articles with hand brush. May prepare his Woodworking Machine Tool Setters and
own polishing material. Operators set-up or operate and monitor
automatic or semi-automatic
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: woodworking machines, such as precision
Code 7522 sawing, shaping, planning, boring, turning
Title Cabinet Makers and Related and woodcarving machines to fabricate or
Workers repair wooden parts for furniture, fixtures
and other wooden products.
7522.2100
Paper Board Maker 7523.0100
Wood Machinist, General
VOLUME II B 265
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Wood Machinist, General sets and periodically with measuring instruments.
operates different types of wood working Finishes processed object by smoothening
machines for turning, planing, shaping, surface with sand paper. Cleans and oils
grooving, jointing etc. of wood according machine. May sharpen tools. May operate
to drawings or required specifications. other wood working machines.
Studies drawings or sample or product
desired. Selects appropriate cutting tools ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
or cutters and fits them to cutter head. Code 7523
Fixes cutter head in machine and adjusts Title Wood Working Machine Setters
guides and machine table to suit and Setter Operators
operations. Starts machine, switches on
levers and feeds trial piece of wood into 7523.0300
machine. Checks specimen with drawing
Wood, Turner Hand
or sample, Re-adjusts position of tools or
machine set up if required and operates
Wood Turner, Hand turns wood into
machine to plane, mould, shape and
desired shape by manually operating
process wood stock to requirements.
improvised lathes for making rolling pins,
Cleans and oils machine. May sharpen
legs of beds, chairs, tables etc. Studies
tools in grinding machine. Is designated as
drawings and specifications. Selects
UNIVERSAL WOOD WORKING MACHINE
suitable piece of wood of appropriate
OPERATOR if engaged in setting and
quality and fits it into rotating spindle of
operating universal wood working
improvised lathe. Directs helper to ply
machine.
attached hand wheel to rotate spindle.
Selects required type of hand tool, holes it
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
in position against rotating wood and
Code 7523
fashions wood to required specifications,
Title Wood Working Machine Setters
smoothens object with sand paper to
and Setter Operators
finish product. May cut and saw timber
using hand saw.
7523.0200
Wood Turner, Machine ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7523
Wood Turner, Machine sets and operates Title Wood Working Machine Setters
power driven wood turning lathe to make and Setter Operators
circular and round wooden objects
according to specifications. Studies 7523.0400
appropriate tools and mounts them on
Shaper Wood
cutter head. Fixes cutter head in machine
and adjusts guides. Mounts required size
Shaper, Wood sets and operates shaping
of wooden stock on machine and aligns it
machine for cutting grooves, angles,
concentrically in position. Starts machine
designs or irregular shape, etc. on wooden
and sets speed. Sets and holds tip of tool
surface. Studies drawing or samples.
against desired portion of rotating wood
Selects appropriate cutting blades and fits
to be processed. Fashions wood according
them securely to rotating spindle of
to specifications or sample using different
machine. Adjusts machine table to
cutting tools, checking its size and shape
produce required shaping operations and
VOLUME II B 266
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
to hold wooden stock in position during Planer, Wood
processing. Starts machine, feeds suitable
pieces of wood and ensures that they are Planer, Wood sets and operates single or
properly guided during cutting operation multiple cutting head machine to plane
to obtain required shape. Removes surface or reduce thickness of wooden
completed pieces from machine and stock to required specifications. Selects
checks them for accuracy with templates appropriate cutting blades and fits them
and scales. Cleans and oils machine. May into cutter head using hand tools. Turns
grind cutters. hand wheel to adjust table for depth of
cut and suit thickness of implanted stock.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Adjusts pressure bar to hold stock firmly
Code 7523 against cutting blades. Starts machine and
Title Wood Working Machine Setters inserts one end of stock between feeding
and Setter Operators rolls and guides it through machine.
Measures planed stock and resets
7523.0500 machine. Turns stock over and re-runs it
Router, Wood through machine to surface other side
and reduce it to desired thickness.
Replaces dull or broken blades and cleans
Router, Wood; Routing Machine
and oils machine. May sharpen and grind
Operator, Wood sets and operates routing
cutting tools. May operate other wood
machine for making various designs on
planing and cutting machines.
wood surface by rotary cutter. Clamps and
tightens selected tool bit in machine
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
chuck, inserts guide pin and sets table
stops. Fastens wood stock securely to Code 7523
table mounted on roller bearings, moves Title Wood Working Machine Setters
it under routing tool to cut designs and Setter Operators
according to drawings or sketches and
regulates depth of cut by pedal operation 7523.0700
as required. Checks accuracy of cutting Four Cutter
using measuring instruments and resets
machine if necessary to ensure accuracy. Four Cutter, Wood sets and operates
Releases pedal to withdraw wood stock machines for cutting grooves and
from cutting tools and removes stock. moulding wood stock for making casing
May draw and trace outline of design on and capping for electrical fittings and such
wood. May operate machine equipped other articles. Sets and fits cutters to
with automatic device for varying depth of vertical and horizontal spindles of
cut. May grind cutters and clean and oil machines, adjusting their positions as
machine. required. Adjusts machine table to hold
wood stock securely in position at
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: required height. Starts machine to rotate
Code 7523 cutters at high speed. Feeds trial piece
Title Wood Working Machine Setters along table guides into machine cutters to
and Setter Operators cut grooves and shape edges and sides.
Checks finished product with drawings or
7523.0600 sketches and makes adjustments to
VOLUME II B 267
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
cutters if necessary. Feeds wood stock drawing or sample to determine shape to
and continues operation. Changes cutters be cut. Selects suitable cutting blades and
when necessary. Cleans and oils fixes them to rotating spindles of
machines. May sharpen tools on grinding machine. Sets blades in required position
machine. May operate other wood cutting or angle and fastens them securely using
machines. spanners. Fits different types of cutters to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: different spindles of machine depending
Code 7523 on type of cutting required, such as for
Title Wood Working Machine Setters grooves, profiles, etc. Adjusts machine
and Setter Operators table to desired position or height for size
of cut to be made and sets guides to hold
7523.0800 stock in position. Starts machine and cuts
triple pairs. Checks trial piece and re-
Wood Sawyer, Hand
adjusts machine if required. Shoves wood
stock between feed rolls which
Woods Sawyer, Hand operates hand saw
automatically carry pieces through
to cut logs in to planks or wooden boards
machine for machining and continues
of required sizes. Marks lines on the log or
operation. Cleans and oils machine. May
timber for cutting it to required sizes Fixes
grind knives to correct profile. May
wooden props or supports at convenient
operate other wood cutting machines.
height to place log of timber for sawing
May design jigs and fixtures for repetitive
and places it securely over supports at
or specific machining operation.
inclined position. Selects saw of
appropriate size and with assistance of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
helper cuts or saws log or timber along
Code 7523
marked line from one end. Inserts
Title Wood Working Machine Setters
wooden or metal wedges between cut slit
and Setter Operators
along marked line where required to
prevent pamming of saw. Sharpens saw
7523.1000
teeth with file when necessary. May work,
Mortiser Operator
singly to size planks to required
dimensions using ripsaw.
Mortiser Operator sets and operates
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: mortising machine for cutting slots of
prescribed dimension in wooden frames
Code 7523
for making joints. Selects and fits
Title Wood Working Machine Setters
appropriate cutting tools to machine
and Setter Operators
spindle. Sets machine table and guides
setters to hold stock in position. Collects
7523.0900
wood stock and checks marking for
Moulder, Wood
dimension of slot to be cut on it. Places
wood stock below cutting tool on machine
Moulder, Wood; Moulding Machine
table. Lowers cutting tool over marked
Operator, Wood sets and operates
area on wooden stock and sets its position
moulding machine for cutting sides of
for slotting. Starts machine and presses
wooden boards, frames etc. to required
down tool to cut slots of required
shape and making specific grooves and
dimensions. Checks dimensions and
profiles with form cutters. Studies
VOLUME II B 268
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
removes processed wood on completion. knives in cutter head of machine and
May clean and oil machine. May grind and tightens set screws with wrench to secure
sharpen cutting tools. May operate other them in position. Collects wood stock and
wood cutting machines. marks cutting line with pencil. Places
fence to guide stock at specified angle to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: cutting knives and places stock on edge
Code 7523 against fence on machine table. Starts
Title Wood Working Machine Setters machine and slides stock over rotating
and Setter Operators cutting knives, using fence as guide.
Checks cuts on stock against blue prints or
7523.1100 sketches using mitre gauges, squares etc.
and makes necessary adjustments. Feeds
Tenoning Machine Operator
stock across cutting knives and continues
operation. Turns stock and machines
Tenoning Machine Operator sets and
other edge frequently checking its width
operates tenoning machine to make
with callipers or gauges to ensure
tenons in wooden frames according to
accuracy of fitting. May smoothen and
specifications for making joints. Selects
reduce wood stock to required thickness.
and fits appropriate cutting blades
May replace broken or dull cutting tools.
securely on rotating spindle of machine.
May grind and sharpen cutting blades.
Adjusts cutters and machine table to suit
May clean and oil machine. May operate
required size of tenons to be cut. Feeds
other wood cutting machines.
wood stock between guide plates on table
to hold it firmly during operation. Starts
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine, pushes wood stock against
Code 7523
cutters to obtain single or double
Title Wood Working Machine Setters
tenoning (cutting one or both sides of
and Setter Operators
wood stock) according to type of machine
operated and adjusts cutters to obtain
7523.1300
tenons of prescribed dimensions. Cleans
and oils machine. May grind and sharpen Driller Wood
cutting blades. May operate tenoning
machine with scribing head, and other Driller Wood; Boring Machine Operator,
wood working machines. Wood sets and operates wood boring
machine for boring holes of required
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: dimensions in wooden frames and
Code 7523 articles. Selects drill bit of appropriate size
Title Wood Working Machine Setters for boring hole and fits it to spindle of
and Setter Operators machine using chuck, collet or sleeve as
necessary. Measures and marks stock for
7523.1200 boring or follows markings already made.
Clamps stock to machine table and
Jointer Machine Operator
centres drill bit over or in front of marks
indicating location of hole. Adjusts spindle
Jointer Machine Operator sets and
stop to regulate depth of hole and starts
operates specially designed machine for
machine. Moves table upward or forward
making plough and tang and other water
and bores required hole in stock.
tight joints. Studies drawings. Fits cutter
VOLUME II B 269
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Withdraws bit from stock and repeats Wood Wool Machine Operator sets and
process. Changes drill bits to bore holes of operates wood wool machine for reducing
different dimensions. Cleans and oils soft wooden stock into long thin fibres
machine. May be designated as commonly used as packing material.
HORIZONTAL or VERTICAL BORER WOOD Selects appropriate cutting tools and
according to type of boring machine mounts them on cutter head. Fixes cutter
operated. head in machine and adjusts wood stock
to tool post. Starts machine to move
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: wood piece to and fro against cutters and
Code 7523 moves cam by hand to control speed of
Title Wood Working Machine Setters tool post to cut fibres of desired thinness
and Setter Operators from wood stock. Checks fineness of
fibres and adjusts operation as required.
7523.1400 May clean and oil machine. May sharpen
or replace dull blades. May operate other
Dowell Machine Operator
wood working machines.
Dowel Machine Operator, Wood;
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Rounding Machine Operator, Wood sets
Code 7523
and operates dowel machine for making
Title Wood Working Machine Setters
round wooden pins of various dimensions
and Setter Operators
for securing joints. Selects and fits cutter
blades of required size in cutter head of
7523.1600
machine. Sets gap between blades equal
to diameter of dowel, using callipers and Wood Carver, Machine
gauges and adjusts stock guides and feed
and take off rollers to size and finish stock Wood Carver, Machine sets and operates
to required specifications. Starts machine, automatic spindle carving machine to
places stock on guides and pushes on end carve ornamental and artistic designs on
of sample between feed rollers. Checks wood. Studies full-size designs and
size of rounded stock with measuring specifications, determines nature of
instruments. Makes adjustments to carving to be done and marks reference
machine if necessary, feeds stock and points on wood block, if necessary. Selects
continues operation. May install cutter appropriate cutter and fits it to machine
heads to cut spirals or longitudinal spindle. Fixes and adjusts wood on
grooves or both in addition to rounding machine bed and starts machine. Lowers
stock. spindle, makes different cuts and
manipulates wood piece against cutter to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: produce desired design. Changes cutter as
Code 7523 necessary, regulates depth of cut by
Title Wood Working Machine Setters pedals, checks accuracy of cutting with
and Setter Operators measuring instruments, makes necessary
adjustments if necessary and completes
7523.1500 design. Ensures that work proceeds
correctly and removes final product from
Wood Wool Machine Operator
machine. May carve design on separate
piece of wood and glue or nail it on main
VOLUME II B 270
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
article. May make jigs for repetitive work. Adjusts gap between feed belt and roller
May clean and oil machine. by observing index needle and starts
machine. Feeds ply-wood or article to be
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: polished by feed belt against revolving
Code 7523 sand paper to get rubbed and
Title Wood Working Machine Setters smoothened. Switches on exhaust fan of
and Setter Operators machine to collect dust during operation
and uses goggles and rubber gloves for
7523.1700 personal safety. Changes grade of sand
paper till required smoothness is
Fret Saw Machine Operator
achieved. May smoothen wooden articles
on simpler machine by fixing them on
Fret Saw Machine Operator; Jig Saw
machine platform not provided with
Machine Operator sets and operates fret
automatic feed arrangement.
saw machine with their reciprocating
blade to cut wooden pieces, plywood etc.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
along marked line. Selects or receives
Code 7523
material, determines pattern of cut and
Title Wood Working Machine Setters
draws or traces design on it. Drills holes in
and Setter Operators
material at appropriate places to pass saw
blade particularly for internal cutting; fixes
7523.9900
saw blade in machine with teeth
downwards and operates foot pedal to Wood Working Machine Setters
start reciprocating movement of saw. and Setter Operators, Others
Manipulates movement of material and
cuts it along marked lines. Removes saw Wood Product Machine Operators, Other
from machine, passes it through drilled include those who operate and monitor
hole, resets saw and continues operation automatic and semiautomatic
for internal cutting. Smoothens edges woodworking machines which perform
after cutting with file or sand paper. May repetitive work and are always set up by
set saw number of times depending on woodworking machine setters not
design and cuts required. elsewhere classified.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7523 Code 7523
Title Wood Working Machine Setters Title Wood Working Machine Setters
and Setter Operators and Setter Operators
7523.1800
Sander Operator Group 753
Sander Operator sets and operates Garment and Related Trades
sanding machine for smoothening and Workers
finishing wooden surfaces with sand
paper. Selects grade of sand paper
Garment and related trades workers fit,
according to degree or smoothness and
alter and repair tailored clothing; design,
finish required and fits it on sanding drum.
and make textile and fur garments,
VOLUME II B 271
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
leather or fur products; repair, renovate machine. Measures customers for size
and decorate garments, gloves and other with inch-tape and record measurements
products of textile; create patterns for for making garments. Cuts material
garments; install, repair and replace according to pattern and size and
upholstery of furniture, fixtures, assembles garment parts by sewing. Fits
orthopaedic appliances and furnishings of stitched garment on customer, marks
automobiles; trim, scrape, tan, buff and alterations to be made and finishes
dye animal hides, pelts or skins; modify garments. May prepare new designs and
and repair footwear and leather articles. Masden Lays and supervise sewing,
stitching, button holing, etc. delegated to
Occupations in this Group are classified other workers. May also repair and
into the following Families: renovate garments.
7531 Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Hatters Code 7531
Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and
7532 Garment and Related Pattern
`Hatters
Makers and Cutters
7533 Sewing, Embroiderers and Related
7531.0101
Workers
Sampling Tailor
7534 Upholsterers and Related Workers
7535 Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
Sampling tailor is responsible for
Fellmongers
developing garment sample as per buyer’s
7536 Shoemakers and Related Workers
specifications in the apparel industry. A
sampling tailor should be able to perform
Family 7531 basic fabric cutting operations and stitch
Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and garments of various designs with different
necklines, sleeves, collar etc. as per the
Hatters
quality standards. This job requires the
individual to have thorough knowledge of
Tailors, dressmakers, furriers and hatters
measurements, garment styles, sampling
fabricate, fit, alter and repair tailored or
and apparel production processes and
hand-made clothing; They produce made-
should be able to sew garments with
to-measure clothing such as suits,
different materials and trims.
overcoats, and dresses from textile
fabrics, light leather, fur and other
material, or make hats or wigs according
Qualification Pack Details:
to customer’s and clothing manufacturer’s
QP NOS Reference AMH/A0701
specifications.
QP NOS Name Sampling Tailor
NSQF Level #N/A
7531.0100
Tailor, General
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7531
Tailor, General makes ladies and gents'
Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and
garments and children's clothes by
Hatters
stitching various components together
according to pattern, by hand or sewing
VOLUME II B 272
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7531.0200 Trouser Maker: Pant Maker stitches
Dress Maker/Ladies Dress Maker together by hand and machine parts of
trousers, breeches and other leg wear
according to instructions of Master Cutter.
Dress Maker stitches together parts of
Joins parts together by basting, ensuring
women's garments such as dresses,
that they are properly aligned. Stitches
blouses, jumpers, brassieres, etc.,
them together by hand and machine.
according to instructions of Master Cutter.
Inserts inner material and attaches lining
Stitches together parts by hand and
as required. Carries out alterations
machine. Inserts inner material, makes
according to markings. Makes
embroidery work, button-holes, etc., and
buttonholes, stitches button and performs
attaches lining, lace, button, etc. Carries
other finishing tasks, or supervises
out alteration as directed. May press
performance of these tasks by Sewer,
garments and supervise work of Sewer,
Hand.
Hand.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7531
Code 7531
Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and
Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and
Hatters
Hatters
7531.0500
7531.0300
Shirt Maker
Coat Maker
Shirt Maker stitches together parts of
Coat Maker stitches together, by hand
shirts, under vests, pyjamas etc.,
and machine, parts of coat, shervani and
according to instructions of Master Cutter.
other body garments according to
Stitches collars and cuffs. Makes button
instructions of Master Cutter. Joins parts
holes and stitches buttons and performs
together by basting ensuring that they are
other finishing tasks. May press garments
properly aligned. Stitches them together
and supervise work of Sewer, Hand.
by hand and machine. Inserts inner
material and attaches lining as required.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Carries out alteration according to
markings. Makes button-holes, stitches Code 7531
buttons and performs other finishing Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and
tasks. May press garment and supervise Hatters
basting, filling, button holding, button
stitching, etc., by Sewer, Hand. 7531.0700
Hat Maker, General
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7531 Hat Maker, General makes various kinds
Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and of hats by marking, cutting, sewing and
Hatters joining components and finishing them by
trimming and decorating. Prepares own
7531.0400 design or copies and adapts existing
Trouser Maker designs. Marks and cuts material
according to pattern or own judgement.
VOLUME II B 273
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Smooths, wires and shapes hat parts and be adjusted as required to suit wearer.
sews them together. Adds trimmings and May prepare and dress wigs for dolls.
decorates hat as required. May make and
alter hats to individual requirements. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7531
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and
Code 7531 Hatters
Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and
Hatters 7531.1200
Tailor, Fur
7531.0900
Cap Maker Tailor, Fur performs all or several of more
difficult tasks in manufacture, alteration,
Cap Maker makes various kinds of caps renovation and repair of garments and
from cloth, felt, fur, velvet and other other articles of fur. Prepares patterns for
fabric by marking, cutting, joining and cutting out and finishing fur articles.
sewing and finishing them by trimming Grades, matches, sorts and prepares furs
and decorating. to be used. Cuts fur according to pattern.
Sews pieces together, usually by machine.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Stretches and trims sewn parts to conform
Code 7531 to pattern. Finishes article by machine and
Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and hand sewing. Presses, repairs, alters and
Hatters renovates fur articles. Estimates cost of
new articles and of alteration, renovation
7531.1000 and repair of used articles and charges
customer accordingly. May work as paid
Wig Maker
employee or on own account.
Wig Maker makes wigs according to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
specifications, fastening strands of hair to
Code 7531
cloth base. Studies requirements; cuts
Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and
paper pattern to shape and size according
Hatters
to customer's measurements; fits and
pleats pattern on to head block and fixes
7531.1300
pleats with silk tapes; cuts silk and silk
gauze to shape, fits over paper pattern Pattern Maker, Fur
and sews to silk tapes; trims and binds
edges; selects hair to suit requirement Pattern Maker, Fur prepares patterns and
and knots them to wig mount on head full-size canvas models of garments and
block by inserting hook-pointed needle in other articles of fur to guide Cutters and
gauze to catch, twist and pull hair Finishers. Draws pattern on paper in
through; makes partings, combs and oils accordance with garment design or
wig, curls hair by water-waving or with customer's measurements. Makes canvas
paper spills; places wig (on head block) in model of garment according to pattern.
open for drying and setting. For theatrical Checks patterns and model for accuracy
wigs, makes stock size mounts which can and makes necessary alterations. Passes
them to garment Cutters or Finishers.
VOLUME II B 274
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Examines completed garment for defects. 7531.1600
Cuts patterns for fur trimmings, Nailor, Fur
accessories and other fur articles and for
alteration of fur articles. May cut patterns
Nailor, Fur stretches and trims dressed
for fancy leather goods.
furs to conform to pattern outline of
garment or other articles. Draws outline
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
of pattern on work table. Dampens skin
Code 7531 side of fur with water. Places fur, skin side
Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and up, on table, stretches it to cover outline
Hatters and nails it in position. Allows fur to dry in
stretched position and removes nails.
7531.1400 Draws outline of paper pattern on skin
Grader and Matcher, Fur side of fur and trims fur along outline with
knife.
Grader and Matcher, Fur examines furs
and sorts them prior to cutting and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
making up into garments or other articles. Code 7531
Compares furs visually and sorts them Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and
according to quality. Selects furs that Hatters
match in colour, thickness and length of
hair and makes them into bundles ready 7531.9900
for Cutter. May specialize in one or more Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and
types of fur.
Hatters, Other
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Fur Tailors and Related Workers, Other
Code 7531
include all other fur tailors and related
Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and
workers such as those engaged in beating,
Hatters
dyeing and trimming hair or fur; assisting
in cutting furs for garment manufacture,
7531.1500
etc., not elsewhere classified.
Cutter, Fur
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Cutter, Fur cuts fur according to pattern Code 7531
for making or repairing garments or other Title Tailors,
articles. Selects required number of furs. Dress Makers, Furriers and Hatters
Arranges fur on pattern outlines, ensuring
that parts to be joined together match in
quality and colour. Cuts furs to required
Family 7532
size and shape with hand knife. May also
perform some or all duties of Grader and
Garment and Related Pattern
Matcher, Fur.
Makers and Cutters
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Textile, leather and related patternmakers
Code 7531
and cutters create precision master
Title Tailors, Dress Makers, Furriers and
patterns for production of garments,
Hatters
VOLUME II B 275
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
other textile, and leather or fur products. necessary. May make technical drawings,
They mark, cut, shape and trim textile, models, and prototype patterns. May
light leather and other materials specialize in designing particular type of
according to blueprints or specifications in article such as gloves, hand bags, etc.
the manufacture of garments, hats and
caps, gloves and miscellaneous products. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7532
7532.0100 Title Garment and Related Pattern
Designer (Garment) Makers and Cutters
Designer; Pattern Maker (Garments) 7532.0300
develops, designs and makes pattern for Case Finisher (Leather Product)
new styles of men's, women's and
children's garments. Studies existing Case Finisher (Leather Prod.) assembles
styles, develops new ideas and draws out and finishes suitcases and radio, jewellery,
full scale drawing of garments on paper. and instrument cases, and lines or covers
Marks and cuts out paper patterns of them with material, such as leather,
different parts of garments. Gets cloth cut velvet, or satin, performing any
according to paper patterns and gets combination of following tasks: Inserts
sample garment stitched as required. hinge wings into slots in top and bottom
Tries garment on model and makes sections of case and secures them in
changes in pattern, if necessary. May grooves, using pinch pliers, or rivets, nails,
make specifications and supervise or screws hinges in position. Opens case
production. and verifies lid angle, using table gauge.
Cuts specified material to size, using
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: pattern and shears, or obtains pre-cut
Code 7532 fabric. Brushes glue on area to be
Title Garment and Related Pattern covered. Positions material on inner or
Makers and Cutters outer surfaces of case and smoothens out
wrinkles, using fingers. Trims excess fabric
7532.0200 from joints, seams, and edges, using knife.
Designer, Leather Articles Glues or nails bracing blocks to case and
covers blocks with material. Presses
cushion or pad into upper and lower
Designer, Leather Articles develops
sections of case. Examines case for
designs and cuts patterns for small leather
misalignment of edges, and opens and
articles. Studies designs of leather
closes lid to test action of hinges and
products from catalogues. Considers
spring. Holds case over air nozzle and
purpose, market trend, preferences of
presses pedal to remove dust and lint.
potential users, technical specifications
Packs cases in shipping cartons. May
and develops improvements or new
crimp lids to case or crimp bottoms to
designs keeping economical aspects and
case frame, using pneumatic-powered
method of production in view. Prepares
crimper. May repair or replace hinges,
sketches showing style, shape, size and
linings, and springs.
similar characteristics of product, and
submits them to management or
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
customer for approval. Alters designs if
VOLUME II B 276
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Code 7532 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Garment and Related Pattern Code 7532
Makers and Cutters Title Garment and Related Pattern
Makers and Cutters
7532.0500
Frame Maker, Cap 7532.0700
Cutter, Hand (Textile Product)
Frame Maker, Cap prepares cap frames
for cap using metal pattern, hand scissors Cutter, Hand (Textile Products) cuts
and jute canvas. Marks paper to required garment parts and other articles to be
size and cuts it using hand scissors. Pastes sewed together from cloth, canvas, etc.,
paper on metal pattern with thick paste. using scissors. Spreads single or multiple
Cuts jute canvas as per specifications layers of cloth, fabric or other material to
using measuring tape and hand scissors. be cut on table or board. Places pattern
Applies thick paste to jute canvas. Fixes on material in such position as to have
pasted canvas to metal pattern. Allows least wastage. Marks outline on material
canvas to dry. Cuts round edges of canvas with chalk. Cuts along outline marked in
and separates canvas from metal pattern chalk or around edge of pattern using
using sharp knife. May give finishing scissors.
touches by putting plastic inner cover,
fixing eyelets, etc. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7532
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Garment and Related Pattern
Code 7532 Makers and Cutters
Title Garment and Related Pattern
Makers and Cutters 7532.0900
Cutter, Machine (Textile Product)
7532.0600
Master Cutter (Garment)
Cutter, Machine (Textile Products) cuts
parts of garments, bags and other articles
Master Cutter (Garments) measures from single or multiple layers of cloth,
customers and cuts parts of garment from knitted or other fabric, hessian, canvas,
cloth for making garment of required size etc., using electrically driven cutting
and style. Measures customers for size machine. Places pattern in such a position
with inch-tape and records over material as to have least wastage.
measurements. Cuts out paper patterns Cuts around edge of pattern or along
with given measurements. Places patterns outlines marked in chalk on material.
on cloth and marks around with pencil.
Cuts various parts along marked lines and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
gives them for stitching. Supervises
Code 7532
stitching and making of garments. Tries
Title Garment and Related Pattern
garment, when prepared, on customer
Makers and Cutters
and marks with chalk any alterations to be
made. Supervises making and finishing
7532.0901
work and finally fits garment on customer.
Garment Cutter (CAM)
VOLUME II B 277
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Garment cutter should be able to take the Layer Man is pre-production job role. The
fabric from stock, load the fabric and key responsibility of a Layer Man is to
program the CAM to run a particular inspect the fabric to identify the presence
design. A garment cutter also removes the of any basic fabric faults, laying and
cut pieces off the conveyer belt and cutting the fabric as per specified length
ensures cutting is done as per product before the fabric is passed on to the parts
requirements. cutting stage.
Qualification Pack Details: Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference AMH/Q1501 QP NOS Reference AMH/Q0201
QP NOS Name Garment Cutter QP NOS Name Layer Man
NSQF Level 4 NSQF Level 3
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7532 Code 7532
Title Garment and Related Pattern Title Garment and Related Pattern
Makers and Cutters Makers and Cutters
7532.0902 7532.1000
Advance Pattern Maker, Garment Cutter, Garment (Leather)
(CAD/CAM)
Cutter, Garment (Leather) cuts leather for
Advance Pattern Maker (CAD/CAM) uses manufacture of garments. Examines
the CAD system to recreate the pattern leather to ensure that it is cut in most
design techniques by transferring ideas to suitable and economical way. Cuts leather
the computer, digitizing and modifying according to pattern of garment parts by
patterns and also the use of CAM to get shears, scissors, hand knife, hand
the patterns and lays cut out in the actual operated guillotine, power driven
sizes. oscillating knives or by machine which
presses shaped knives through leather.
Qualification Pack Details: May specialize in one or more types of
cutting and be designated accordingly.
QP NOS Reference AMH/Q1101
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Name Advance Pattern
Maker (CAD/CAM) Code 7532
NSQF Level 6 Title Garment and Related Pattern
Makers and Cutters
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7532.1001
Code 7532
Title Garment and Related Pattern Cutter, Goods and Garments
Makers and Cutters (Leather)
7532.0903 Cutter (Goods and Garments lays out,
Layer Man marks, and cuts leather or non-leather
material into parts for articles using
cutting dies. The critical component of the
role is to position leather/non-leather for
VOLUME II B 278
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
cutting tonsure good number and quality pattern. May also mark positions for
of cut pieces. stitching buttons.
Qualification Pack Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q6103 Code 7532
QP NOS Name Cutter (Goods and Title Garment and Related Pattern
Garments) Makers and Cutters
NSQF Level 4
7532.1300
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Cutter Tent
Code 7532
Title Garment and Related Pattern Cutter, Tent marks and cuts tent cloth
Makers and Cutters according to specification. Studies design
or specification and plans cut out of parts
7532.1100 to avoid wastes. Marks outline of pattern
Cutter, Gloves (Leather) with crayon or chalk and cuts material
with scissors. May sew tent by machine or
Cutter, Gloves (Leather) cuts leather for hand.
manufacture of gloves. Dampens and
stretches leather to ascertain flexibility, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
location of flaws and most suitable and Code 7532
economical way of cutting. Cuts leather Title Garment and Related Pattern
according to pattern of glove parts by Makers and Cutters
shears, scissors, hand knife, hand
operated guillotine, power-driven 7532.9900
oscillating knives or by machine which Garment and Related Pattern
presses shaped knives through leather.
Makers and Cutters, Other
Trims edges of finished gloves. May
specialize in one or more types of cutting
Textile, Leather and Related Pattern
and be designated accordingly.
Makers and Cutters, Other include
workers who make patterns and mark and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
cut textile, leather and other materials in
Code 7532
the manufacture of garments, gloves and
Title Garment and Related Pattern
miscellaneous products not elsewhere
Makers and Cutters
classified.
7532.1200
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Button Hole Maker
Code 7532
Title Garment and Related Pattern
Button-Hole Marker; Button-hole Marking Makers and Cutters
Boy marks positions for button-holes on
garments. Places required pattern on
Family 7533
garment in correct position. Marks
positions for button-holes with pencil or
Sewing, Embroiderers and Related
chalk on garments through holes in
Workers
VOLUME II B 279
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Sewing, embroidery and related workers QP NOS Reference AMH/Q1001
sew together, repair, renovate and QP NOS Name Hand Embroiderer
decorate garments, gloves and other NSQF Level 4
products of textile, fur, light leather and
other materials and fabricate tents sails, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
awnings and tarpaulins. They work mainly Code 7533
by hand using a needle and thread but Title Sewers, Embroiderers and Related
may perform some tasks using a sewing Workers
machine.
7533.0300
7533.0100 Hand Embroiderer, Zari/Hand
Sewer, Hand Embroider, Traditional Crafts
Sewer, Hand; Stitcher Hand; Hemming Hand Embroiderer, Zari; Zari Worker;
Boy sews together by hands parts of Zardozi Worker sews ornamental designs
textile, fur and leather garments, by hand over stamped or stencilled
furnishing and other textile and fur patterns on fabric, using special
products using needle and thread. May embroidery material (zari) such as kora,
repair garments, stitch buttons and do kangani, sadi, nakshi, beads, tikli, sitare,
decorative stitching. May be designated etc. Stitches 'baithan' (cloth which forms
according to type of article or material base) to string loops of 'Karchob' or 'adda'
stitched such as SEWER, HAND (Fur); (embroidery frame), adjusts 'Karchob' so
SEWER, HAND(Leather); SEWER, that 'baithan' is evenly taut on all sides.
HAND(Garments); etc. Stitches, cotton, wool or silk fabric to
work on 'baithan' in frame. Stencil design
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: to be embroidered on fabric. Cuts zari
Code 7533 material into pieces of required size with
Title Sewers, Embroiderers and Related scissors. Threads needle with yarn and
Workers stitches neatly 'zari' pieces and beads etc.,
of proper size, colour and kind over
7533.0201 stencilled design on fabric to make
required pattern. Removes embroidered
Hand Embroiderer, General
fabric from frame. May trace designs on
fabric.
Hand Embroiderer, General sews
ornamental designs by hand over printed
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
or stencilled patterns on cloth using
Code 7533
needle and coloured thread. Fastens
Title Sewers, Embroiderers and Related
embroidery hoop or frame over area of
Workers
cloth to be worked to keep cloth taut
7533.0600
while being embroidered. Threads needle
with proper kind and colour of thread, Darner
embroiders along or over lines of printed
or stencilled design on cloth using Darner; Cloth Mender repairs defective or
knowledge of various types of stitches damaged portion of cloth or garment by
required. hand using matching thread and needle.
Qualification Pack Details: Spreads cloth or garment and checks it
VOLUME II B 280
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
thoroughly to locate defects and metal runner into stick for holding ends of
damages. Selects or dyes thread to match ribs together and top spring grooves cut in
colour and shade of cloth to be darned. stick. Fixes 'U' shaped nail in stick near top
Removes miswoven threads or knots by to stop metal runner going beyond limit.
nipper. Re-weaves or darns missing Assembles metal notch into stick and
threads by needle, using thread of running metal wire through eyelets of ribs
required shade and colour. Trims ends to keep ribs in secured position in notch.
with scissors to make mended portion Fastens ribs to runner by wiring eyelets to
look uniform with pattern of cloth. May runner. Fits other components such as
press darned cloth or garment with leather washer, top cap and ferrule.
electric or ordinary iron. Attaches handles by glueing to stick.
Checks frame by opening and closing it to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ensure its correct assembly. Is designated
Code 7533 as TAKE WALLA if engaged in cutting
Title Sewers, Embroiderers and Related umbrella cloth according to pattern and
Workers stitching or fixing to frame. May repair
7533.0700 defective umbrella by replacing worn
cloth or other component parts.
Sewer, Tent (Hand)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Sewer, Tent (Hand); Tent Sewer (Hand)
Code 7533
sews together by hand pieces of cloth or
Title Sewers, Embroiderers and Related
canvas to make tents. Lays pieces to be
Workers
stitched back to back, places tape
(niwar)between edges and temporarily
7533.0900
stitches parts together leaving gaps for
eyelets, loops and rope. Reshapes any Umbrella Examiner
portion not fitting properly and sews parts
with final stitching. Stitches rope loops to Umbrella Examiner examines finished
bottom of tent. May stitch floral designs umbrellas for proper assembly. Examines
on tent, if desired. fitting to secure fastening and opens and
closes umbrella to see that ribs and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: runners function smoothly. Gets defective
Code 7533 parts replaces with new ones. May
Title Sewers, Embroiderers and Related assemble and fit covers to umbrellas.
Workers
7533.0800 Qualification Pack Details:
Umbrella Maker QP NOS Reference
QP NOS Name
NSQF Level
Umbrella Maker assembles complete
umbrella by fixing various component
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
parts such as collapsible metal frame,
springs, and umbrella cloth, to stick. Uses Code 7533
jig to mark points on cane stick for cutting Title Sewers, Embroiderers and Related
and fixing different fixtures. Uses saw to Workers
cut grooves of desired length. Affixes box
cup to hold in closed position. Inserts 7533.1000
VOLUME II B 281
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Sail and Awning Maker required places to strengthen tent. Makes
holes in tent at appropriate places and
Sail and Awning Maker lays out thick stitches around them to support
cloth, canvas and like materials, fabricates bamboos. May cut tent cloth. May sew
and assembles them into sails, awning leather around stitched holes for strength.
(shamiana) and tarpaulins. Lays out full
scale drawing on floor according to blue ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
prints or sketches, using chalk. Cuts Code 7533
pattern from paper according to full scale Title Sewers, Embroiderers and Related
drawing. Marks outline on material with Workers
crayon. Cuts material with shears or
power cutter. Sews section of material 7533.1200
together on power sewing machine. Doll Maker
Installs grommets, metal fittings, and
fasteners by machine or measures and
Doll Maker performs one or more hand or
marks off grommet holes, punches them
machine tasks in making of moulded or
and sews galvanized iron rings to edge of
stuffed dolls or stuffed toys. Moulds doll
holes by hand. Splices, inserts and hems
parts from composition material by
manila, wire rope or any other type of
operating a press or stuffs previously
strong rope in edges to relieve strain.
sewn parts with cotton, excelsion or other
Secures rope or cable to finished article.
material to give them shape; fastens legs
Wraps and sews parts of rope or wire
and arms on to torso; affixes artificial eyes
which are subject to chafing. Installs and
in head; secures head to shoulders by
adjusts completed product according to
means of a shank collar so that head may
requirements. Stuffs padding material
be turned at will; dresses dolls by hand
where necessary for protection. May be
with under and outer garments, fastens
designated according to type of product
them with hooks, buttons or ribbons. May
made.
be designated according to type of work
performed.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7533 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Sewers, Embroiderers and Related
Code 7533
Workers
Title Sewers, Embroiderers and Related
Workers
7533.1100
Tailor, Tent (Machine) 7533.9900
Sewers, Embroiderers and Related
Tailor, Tent (Machine) sews or joins cloth
Workers, Other
pieces on machine to make tent.
Assembles pre-cut pieces of tent cloth.
Sewers, Embroiderers and Related
Studies pattern of tent by examining each
Workers, Other include all other sewers,
part and connecting them temporarily.
embroiderers and related workers
Inserts proper size needle and cotton
engaged in other types of sewing and
thread in machine. Overlaps adjacent
embroidery work, not elsewhere
segments and sews them together. Sews
classified.
cord and tape and attaches rope at
VOLUME II B 282
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Upholsterer, Orthopaedic
Code 7533 Appliances
Title Sewers, Embroiderers and Related
Workers Upholsterer, Orthopaedic Appliances
installs, repairs and replaces upholstery of
wheeled chairs, and makes and repairs
Family 7534 other appliances for persons who are
differently-abled (physical). Receives
Upholsterers and Related Workers directions regarding type of upholstery or
repair work to be done. Cuts and fits
cotton, rubber foam moss, other padding
Upholsterers and related workers install,
materials, rexine, leather, etc. as required.
repair and replace upholstery of furniture,
Cuts and tacks hessian cloth, sets padding
fixtures, orthopaedic appliances; seats,
and fastens it in position. Measures and
panels, convertible and vinyl tops and
cuts covering material and tacks it in
other furnishings of automobiles, railway
position. Trims excess materials and
coaches, aircraft, ships and similar items
conceals edges by tacking leather or
with fabric, leather, rexine or other
rexine tape. Replaces or repairs raw hide
upholstery material. They also make and
covering of artificial limbs. May renew
repair cushions, quilts and mattresses.
upholstery of wheeled chairs and
orthopaedic appliances. May repair shoes
7534.0100
for deformed feet.
Upholsterer, Furniture
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Upholsterer; Furniture installs, repairs or
Code 7534
replaces upholstery of furniture. Removes
Title Upholsterers and Related Workers
old upholstery. Stretches and tacks new
webbing to frame. Fastens springs by
7534.0300
nailing them to frame and tying them to
each other with cord. Covers springs with Upholsterer, Vehicle
binding material, places cotton, rubber
composition or other soft material l over Upholsterer, Vehicle installs covering and
springs for padding, then tacks another cushioning for seats and for other
layer of binding material to secure furnishings on motor cars, carts, railway
padding. Cuts covering fabric to size and coaches, aircrafts and other types of
tacks it in place. Tacks braid over end of vehicles. Takes measurements for
covering material to conceal rough edges. furnishings or works from drawings. Cuts
May replace damaged springs, may do out materials. Makes and fits springs,
minor repairs to broken wooden parts of padding and covering to seats. Fits lining
furniture and may sew covering material. to roof, doors and other parts. Cuts out
and fixes materials for excluding sounds
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and draughts. May lay floor covering and
make and fit vehicle blinds and fabric
Code 7534
roofs.
Title Upholsterers and Related Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7534.0200
Code 7534
VOLUME II B 283
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Upholsterers and Related Workers 7534.9900
Upholsterers and Related Workers,
7534.0400
Other
Cushion Maker
Upholsterer and Related Workers, Other
Cushion Maker; Cushion Stuffer; Cushion include all other upholsterers and related
Mat Maker makes cushion covers and workers such as those engaged in cutting
stuffs them with moss, hair, feather, coir out or completely making curtains,
jute or cotton. Cuts upholstery cloth pelmets, wall and furniture covers, quilts
according to size of cushion and sews and other soft furnishings, not elsewhere
pieces together, leaving opening at one classified.
end. Stuffs material into cushion and
beats cushion with hand or stick to make ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
packing even. Sews open end of cover and
Code 7534
stitches piping along edges to preserved
Title Upholsterers and Related Workers
shape of cushion. May repair and rebuild
cushions. May be designated as
MATTRESS MAKER if engaged in making
Family 7535
mattresses.
Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Fellmongers
Code 7534
Title Upholsterers and Related Workers
Pelt dressers, tanners and fellmongers
trim, scrape, clean, tan, buff and dye
7534.0500
animal hides, pelts or skins to produce
Mattress Maker (Spring)
leather stock and finished furs for making
garments and other products.
Mattress Maker (Spring) pads and covers
innerspring assemblies to form mattress.
7535.0100
Cuts cover material, using cutting knife
Sorter, Hides and Skin
and scissors, and spreads and staples
burlap, leno, or sisal cloth to both sides of
innerspring assemblies. Spreads padding Sorter, Hides and Skins sorts and grades
over sides of innerspring and tends tape- hides and skins before or after processing.
edge machine that sews cover over Examines hides for weight, thickness and
padding. Tufts mattresses by hand or by colour and checks quality by touch;
tending machine to hold padding in place. inspects hides for defects, such as bran
Sews roll edges on mattress by hand or by into groups; selects hides suitable for
machine. processing;' examines and grades
processed hides rejecting and returning
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: hides for reprocessing where necessary.
May be designated according to material
Code 7534
sorted as CALF SKIN SORTER, PATENT
Title Upholsterers and Related Workers
LEATHER SORTER.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 284
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Code 7535 them in lime solution to soften hair for de-
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and hairing. Fills pit or tank with required
Fellmongers quantity of water; prepares lime solution
by mixing specified quantity of lime
7535.0200 powder with water; pours lime solution in
Flayer pit or tank containing water and stirs with
stick for proper mixing of solution with
water; collects salted skins and cleans
Flayer removes skin or hide of slaughtered
them with water to remove salt and other
or dead animal using different types of
foreign matter; dumps cleaned skins in
knives by cutting skin from tail end to
lime tank to soak thoroughly (completely
neck on abdomen side and releasing skin
immersed in lime solution for a specified
from body by pulling by hand. Positions
time);changes positions of skins or hides
carcass of slaughtered or dead animal by
periodically in tank to ensure that all skins
suspending hind legs to a beam with rope
and hides are properly soaked in all parts;
or iron hooks at convenient height or
transfers periodically lime soaked skins
laying it with legs turned upward on
from tank to tank containing different
ground or work bench necessary to assist
strengths of lime liquor to complete cycle
flaying; selects suitable knife and cuts skin
of proper treatment of skin for further
from tail end to neck on abdomen; cuts
processing, removes lime treated stock
tissues and separates skin from body;
from tank and stalks them separately,
releases skin from body by cutting tissues
empties and cleans tank. May de-hair skin
and pulling skin gently with hand avoiding
or hide. May tan leather.
damage to skin; sprinkles water frequently
to soften flesh to release skin from body
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
by cutting tissues and pulling skin gently
with hand avoiding damage to skin and to Code 7535
avoid damage while cutting and pulling. Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
May remove head and forelegs of animals Fellmongers
before flaying. May dress meat for
consumption. May tan skins. May work as 7535.0400
one of a team and be designated De-hairer, Hand
according to particular operation
performed. De-hairer, Hand removes hair from skin or
hide soaked in lime water by hand, using
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: blunt knife to prepare for further process
Code 7535 of tanning. stretches wet hide over iron
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and piece fixed in inclined position with hair
Fellmongers side upward; scraps hair off hide using
circular or two handled knife ensuring that
7535.0300 skin is not damaged and all hairs are
Lime Pitman, Leather removed completely from skin; piles
scraped hides. May remove superfluous
flesh from skin.
Line Pitman, Leather; Lime Yard Jobber;
Paddle Man Leather prepares lime
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
solution in pits, tanks or vats and treats
hides and skins by thoroughly soaking Code 7535
VOLUME II B 285
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and leather after prescribed period; rinses de-
Fellmongers limed skin or hide in water thoroughly;
hangs skins to ooze out excess water;
7535.0500 drains out used de-limed solution from
Flesher, Hand tank; cleans tank with water and repeats
process. May operate revolving drum for
de liming skins and hides by filling drum
Flesher, Hand removes superfluous flesh
with de-liming solution and dumping
and fat from de-haired skin or hide using
limed hide in drum.
sharp curved hand knife for further
processing. Collects de-haired skin or hide
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
from central point for fleshing. Places de-
haired skin, stretching it by hand on beam Code 7535
(a curved piece of wood) with flesh side Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
turned upward; holds knife with both Fellmongers
hands and moves it downwards at inclined
angel on fleshing surface to remove flesh 7535.0700
and fat from skin taking care not to Scudder, Hand
damage skin; changes position of skin on
beam frequently for fleshing skin Scudder, Hand removes epidermis hair
completely; places fleshed skins at central roots, pigment cells and lime salts from
point. May be designated as BEAMER, grain side of hide or skin, before tanning
LEATHER if engaged in removing flesh by hand, using double handled curved
from hide or skin soaked in bark or knife. Collects de-haired and fleshed skins
myrobalan liquor. May sharpen knife on or hides from central point for scudding.
stone or machine. Places de-haired skin with grain side up on
beam (a rounded board on which wet
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: hides or skins are stretched to remove
Code 7535 flesh and hair prior to tanning) stretching
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and it by hand. Scrapes surface to remove hair
Fellmongers roots, pigment cells and lime salts with
double handled blunt knife. (scudding
7535.0600 knife). Ensures that skin is not damaged or
Delimer cut during process. Soaks scudded skin in
water for a prescribed period; repeats
process of scraping of left over hair and
De-limer processes hides or skins treated
soaking in water till skin or hide is cleaned
with lime in fat-and-de-liming solution for
off hair roots, lime salts, etc.
required period to remove lime, reduce
their swelling and make them flexible.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Prepares de-liming solution in vat by
mixing chemicals, acids and other de- Code 7535
liming materials in prescribed quantities in Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
water; fills pit or tank with required Fellmongers
amount of water and pours de-liming
solution in tank; stirs solution and changes 7535.0900
position of skin or hide in de-liming tank Fluffer, Hand
using wooden paddle; removes de-limed
VOLUME II B 286
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Fluffer, Hand removes fluff from flesh side or vat containing water and agitates
of skin by rubbing whole surface of skin mixture vigorously with paddle; tests
with burnt stone or brick. Spreads skin mixture for specific gravity and adds
stretched over table with flesh side materials to mixture to obtain solution of
upwards; rubs entire surface applying specified gravity; immerses hides or skins
pressure by hand with burnt stone or in bark pit or vat placing one above other
brick to remove fluff from skin till surface for a specified period to allow hides or
of leather becomes smooth and soft. skins to soak in solution; changes
positions of hides or skins periodically in
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: pit to ensure that all are properly
Code 7535 saturated with tanning solution; removes
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and hides or skins from bark pit after a
Fellmongers specified period; extracts sample piece of
leather and boils it in water to test
7535.1000 completeness of tanning and continues
tanning if necessary. Stacks or hangs them
Staker, Hand
in shade for drying. May retain hides to
restore colour lost in bleaching, splitting
Staker, Hand softens leather end by
or other processes. May be designated
placing it on blunt metal plate and by
according to type of tanning solution used
pulling it backwards and forwards over
as BARK TANNER; CHESTNUT TANNER;
edge of stake. Conditions hides on
CHROME-TANNING WHEETMAN; OAK
previous day by keeping them in moist
TANNER.
sawdust; inserts blunt metal plate (staking
plate) over fixed rod; holds ends of skin or
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
leather with both hands and rubs surface
Code 7535
of leather vigorously back and forth over
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
blunt blade to make it soft and pliable.
Fellmongers
May apply chemical solution to leather
surface to make it soft preparatory to
7535.1200
further process. May operate staking or
glazing machine. Drum Man (Tanning)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Drum Man; Drum Operator (Tanning)
Code 7535 operates rotary drum containing tanning
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and solution to convert hides and skins into
Fellmongers leather, according to specifications.
Weighs tanning agents, such as bark
7535.1100 powder or chemicals, following tanning
formula; loads agents and hides or skins
Bark Pitman (Tanning)
into drum; turns valve to fill drum with
water, and turns steam valve to heat
Bark Pitman (Tanning) prepares bark and
water to specified temperature observing
myrobalan liquor and treats hides or skins
meters and gauzes; locks drum door and
in them for tanning. Mixes prescribed
moves lever to rotate drum for specified
quantity of tanning bark or myrobalan
period of time; removes drum door,
powder with water to make liquor or
replaces it with grating, and rotates drum
solution; pours prepared solution into pit
VOLUME II B 287
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
to drain tanning solution through grating. ingredients with water to prepare
May boil sample of tanned hide or skin in colouring solutions; pours colouring
water to determine thoroughness of solution into tray or drum and adds oil
tannings. May specialize in particular type (softening agent); pulls hide through tray
of tanning and be designated accordingly. until specified colour is obtained or places
hides in drum and starts machine to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: tumble hides in solution for specified
Code 7535 time; examines test piece of hide and
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and bleach or further colouring if necessary to
Fellmongers obtain desired effect; removes dyed
leather; drains colour solution and washes
7535.1300 drum and equipment. May be specifically
designated as GLOVE DYER, VAT DYER,
Leather, Currier
CHROME DYER, DRUM DYER.
Leather Currier treats tanned leather with
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
fats and oils, softens it by flexing, rolls it
Code 7535
under pressure for converting into
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
finished form. Scrapes hide with tool to
Fellmongers
expel moisture and scum left from
tanning; applies grease, oil, soap or other
7535.1500
compounds to hide by hand or machine;
softens hide by stroking it with knife Embosser, Leather
blade, flexing it over rigid blade or by
rolling it under pressure in machine; rubs Embosser, Leather; Embosser-Press Man;
hair side of hide against itself to bring out Embossing-Press Operator operates
grain; removes rough spots and blemishes machine to imprint designs on leather or
from hides by hand scraping or by leather articles, such as wallets, cushion
machine; polishes hide by hand or and key cases. Selects specified embossing
machine. May also dye and stain leather. plate, bolts plate into chase, positions and
May operate staking, buffing and glazing secures chase into ram of machine; turns
machine. switch or steam valve to heat plate to
specified temperature according to type
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: of leather; pulls level that lowers ram to
Code 7535 impress designs on leather or article. May
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and make bed for embossing plate, using card
Fellmongers board and paper.
7535.1400 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Dyer, Leather Code 7535
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
Fellmongers
Dyer, Leather; Colourer, Hides and Skins
prepares colour solutions, dyes and stains
7535.1600
to match specified colour samples or
according to formulae and applies or Seasoner, Leather
supervises their application to dressed
leather. Weighs and mixes specified
VOLUME II B 288
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Seasoner, Leather seasons leather by simulate hair of another fur-bearing
applying chemical solution or oil evenly on animal; smoothens and stretches dressed
surface by hand brush and allowing it to pelts and dries them in shade. May be
dry in open air. Mixes different seasoning designated as PELT GRADER; PELT DYER;
chemical compounds such as nitro PELT FINISHER, if engaged in grading and
cellulose, lacquer, resin, oil etc. in dyeing or finishing pelts only.
prescribed proportions; spreads leather
on table; coats seasoning solution over ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
surface of leather evenly using hand Code 7535
brush; hangs leather (seasoned) in open Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
air for drying. Is designated as SPRAYER Fellmongers
LEATHER if uses spray gun to spray 7535.1800
chemical solution on leather to give
Pelt Grader
desired pigment or dye finish.
Pelt Grader sorts fur or wool-bearing pelts
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
before or immediately after they have
Code 7535
been dressed. Compares untreated pelts
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
visually and sorts them according to type,
Fellmongers
quality, size, colour and markings. Sorts
pelts after they have been dressed, dyed
7535.1700
or otherwise treated. May be designated
Pelt Dresser, General according to nature of work, such as
GRADER FUR; MATCHER FUR; etc.
Pelt Dresser, General prepares finished
furs from raw pelts by de-fleshing with ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
knife, removing superfluous hair; treating Code 7535
and pickling pelts with chemicals and Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
solutions; simulating hairs with dyes, Fellmongers
stretching and softening finished pelts etc.
treats flesh side of skin with salt or other 7535.1900
chemicals for preserving or tanning;
Pelt Flesher
scrapes particles from raw pelt with knife
or stretches skin over fixed steel blade
Pelt Flesher removes particles of flesh and
and works it back and forth, taking great
fat from fur or wool-bearing pelts prior to
care not to damage hair roots embedded
curing or other processing. Scrapes
in skin; tacks skin, fur side up, over beam,
particles from pelt with knife or stretches
removes loose hair, and blattens fur by
skin over fixed steel blade and works it
stroking it with double handled, blunt
back and forth, taking great care not to
edged knife, occasionally dusting fur with
damage hair roots embedded in skin. May
powder to make hair more visible; evens
remove particles by use of power-
length of fur over entire skin with thin,
operated revolving knife. May reduce
keen-edged knife, scissors or shears;
thickness of hides by paring with machine
treats skin with necessary chemicals and
or hand knife.
solution for preservation of hair on pelt;
applies dyes to pelt with feather or brush
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to improve appearance of fur or to
Code 7535
VOLUME II B 289
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and through power-operated machine or by
Fellmongers holding pelt flat on table with one hand
and pulling it taut with other. May also
7535.2000 finish pelt by fluffing, beating, brushing
Pelt Plucker and Trimmer and combing fur.
Pelt Plucker and Trimmer removes long
coarse hair from fur pelts and trims
underlying hair to even length. Tacks skin,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
fur side up, over beam. Removes hair and
flattens fur by stroking it with double- Code 7535
handled blunt-edged knife, occasionally Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
dusting fur with powder to make hair Fellmongers
more visible. Evens length of fur over
entire skin with thin, keen edged knife 7535.9900
scissors or shears. Pelt Dressers, Tanners and Fell
Mongers, Other
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7535 Pelt Dressers, Tanners and Fellmongers,
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and Other include all other workers engaged
Fellmongers in grading, fleshing, stretching, dressing,
tanning, seasoning etc. not elsewhere
7535.2100 classified.
Pelt Dyer, Hand
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Pelt Dyer, Hand applies dye to fur-bearing Code 7535
pelts by hand. Applies dyes to felt with Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
feather or brush to improve appearance Fellmongers
of fur or to simulate hair of another fur-
bearing animal. May spray dyes on fur, Family 7536
mix own dyes and be designated
Shoemakers and Related Workers
according to type of dyeing performed.
Shoemakers and related workers make,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
modify and repair standard, custom or
Code 7535
orthopaedic footwear and natural or
Title Pelt Dressers, Tanners and
synthetic leather articles, such as luggage,
Fellmongers
handbags and belts, (except for leather
garments, hats and gloves), or participate
7535.2200
in the manufacture of shoes and related
Pelt, Strecher
goods. They decorate, reinforce or finish
shoes, luggage, handbags and belts.
Pelt Stretcher stretches, or smoothens
and stretches, skins of dressed pelts. Pulls
7536.0100
softened and greased pelts over fixed
Shoemaker, Hand
blade by hand to enlarge area and smooth
texture of skin. Stretches pelt by feeding it
VOLUME II B 290
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Shoe Maker, Hand; Shoe Maker, General Shoe Maker, Orthopaedic makes
makes complete shoe or other footwear complete footwear, mainly of leather, for
mainly of leather for each individual customers with foot or leg deformities.
customer. Takes measurement of Studies drawings and other specifications
customer’s feet and studies design of shoe or takes necessary measurements to
or footwear to be made. Selects and make footwear according to customer’s
estimates material required for making need. Selects leather and gets special last
different components such as upper, made to suit necessity if required.
lining, sole, etc. Marks leather Prepares patterns, chooses materials and
components with patterns and cuts them cuts out parts by hand as per patterns
with knife (rapi) ensuring accuracy and made. Thins edges of parts of upper by
minimum wastage. Skives leather edges cutting or shaving. Presses and bends
with skiving knife to reduce thickness of parts into shape, glues lining to leather
different sections to be joined together. parts and sews them together. Punches
Prepares and carefully applies cementing eyelet holes and inserts eyelets. Tacks
solution by brush at skived portion for insole to last, pulls upper on to last to give
joining, taking care not to splash solution it required shape and checks alignment of
on leather surface while joining. Glues toe and heel of upper. Builds up sole
lining to leather parts and sews sole, where required, folds bottom of upper
upper and other components by hand or over edge of insole or built-up middle
sewing machine. Punches eyelet holes and sole, fixes them together and fixes outer
inserts eyelets in position, for lacing, by sole to upper. Builds up and fixes heel.
hand or machine. Rolls and pulls upper on Trims and smooths where necessary,
last, nails it, keeps perfect alignment of applies inked wax stain or paint where
toe and heel and shapes it according to required, inserts thin inner sole and gives
pattern by light hammering and final finish. May do ornamental nicking.
stretching. Sorts out twists and applies May take plaster casts of deformed leg or
wax on thread to make it stronger. foot and prepare drawings. May use
Stitches sole and other portions using awl prepared uppers with necessary
and waxes thread. Cuts and prepares heel modifications.
and attaches it to sole by nailing. Trims
and finishes edges of shoe using knife ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
(rapi) and glass piece. Cuts and fixes thin Code 7536
inner-sole with glue. Applies colour or Title Shoemakers and Related Workers
polish and gives finishing touches to
shoes. Checks each pair of completed 7536.0300
shoe for uniformity rectifies defects if any
Shoe Repairer, Cobbler/Shoemaker
and puts them on lasts for retention of
Cobbler
shape and form. May repair footwear.
Shoe Repairer; Cobbler; Mochi repairs and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
reconditions old, worn out and defective
Code 7536
shoes, sandals, slippers, etc. using hand
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers
tools to make them serviceable. Carries
own tools and materials goes round
7536.0200
different localities, and collects worn out
Shoemaker, Orthopaedic
footwear from customers for repairs.
VOLUME II B 291
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Examines defects, determines repairs to Cutter, Hand; Clicker Hand (Foot-wear)
be done and settles repair charges with cuts components of shoes from tanned
customer. Removes or cuts off worn out hides. Selects and spreads on wooden
portion of footwear and repairs them by clicking board leather of thickness and
re-soling (either full or half) attaching quality appropriate to component to be
heels, stitching ripped seams, skiving and cut (heel, tongue, sole, toe-cap, etc.).
patching with new pieces of leather after Notes direction of stretch and any
softening in water, etc. as necessary, defective spots. Plans cutting to obtain
using. Knife (rapi) awl, hammer, last, nails, maximum number of useable pieces from
waxed thread, glass, etc. Fixes nails where leather. Stretches leather, places tin
necessary by placing shoe on iron last and pattern on it and cuts out pieces with
ensures that sharp ends of nails are well knife, continuing cutting until leather is
bedded inside leather. Polishes shoes used up. Counts pieces cut, stamps them
after repairs if desired by customer. May with his identification number and
repair other leather articles. May work as bundles them. Sharpens his cutting knives.
paid employee at big repairing shops. May prepare his time sheets.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7536 Code 7536
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers Title Shoemakers and Related Workers
7536.0400
Pattern Maker (Foot Wear) 7536.0600
Skiver, Hand (Foot Wear)
Pattern Maker (Footwear) prepares
patterns for cutting or trimming parts of Skiver; Hand (Footwear) tapers leather
footwear. Makes temporary paper pattern components of footwear with knife to
of various parts of shoes, such as ramp, reduce thickness of parts to be joined.
tongue, or toe-box by sketching part Determines amount of tapering required
(using drawing or written directions as on parts to be joined. Softens edges of
guide) and cutting around outline, or by leather in water and tapers (skives)
fitting paper over shoe last to obtain thickness of edges by cutting off leather at
contour. Stencils papers pattern into angle with skiving knife. Matches parts
sheet metal, thin wood, or millboard, and skived by putting one over other to assure
saws out finished pattern. May bind edges that they fit properly and that no ridge
of pattern with thin metal strip. May cut will be formed. May join components by
patterns for article other than shoes. adhesive and stitching.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7536 Code 7536
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers Title Shoemakers and Related Workers
7536.0500 7536.0800
Cutter, Hand Laster, Hand
VOLUME II B 292
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Laster, Hand joins upper of shoe to sole by around welt of shoe. Cuts groove
pulling upper over last and nailing to sole. manually with knife along guide line in
Applies French chalk or wax to proper size sole if channelled stitch is required.
and shape last to prevent stitching of Softens sole and welt with water to
lining. Tacks insole lightly to last; inserts facilitate stitching. Pierces awl through
shoe counter and toe-puff in upper; pulls welt and sole, draws one end of cord
upper on last and tacks to sole, checking through hole, punches another hole and
frequently to avoid folds and wrinkles. draws cord through hole from opposite
May nail metal or bamboo shank to insole. direction to form lock-stitch. Levels sole
May tack rand pieces and heel lift to seat. when sewed to welt by beating it with
May mount sandals on last. hammer. Feels by touch and sight and
ensures correct stitching of sole. Trims off
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: edges of sole if necessary. May nail iron
Code 7536 tips in sole. May operate welt grooving
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers machine.
7536.1200 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Counter Moulder Code 7536
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers
Counter Moulder; Stiffener Moulder
7536.1600
(Footwear) operates counter moulding
machine to mould counters or stiffeners Heel Attacher, Hand (Foot Wear)
(shoe component) to shape of heel. Sets
mould of required shape and size in Heel Attacher, Hand (Footwear) fixes
machine. Places counter or stiffener it leather and rubber heels to shoes by
(mould). Depresses foot pedal to start driving nails with hammer. Collects heels
machine which bends and presses counter to be attached according to size and
into required shape. Releases foot pedal shape of shoes. Selects well pointed nails
and takes out mould at counter. Cleans of required size. Sets shoe on iron last
and oils machine. (metal devices to hold shoes) with sole
upward. Places heel on shoe and adjusts
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: its position. Drives nails with hammer
Code 7536 through heel and heel-seat to clinch them
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers to insole. Checks frequently while nailing
and ensures proper nailing and
7536.1500 adjustment of heel to insole. Trims off
edges of heels with knife to give desired
Sole Stitcher, Hand
shape. May attach iron-tips to heel.
Sole Stitcher; Hand; Sole Sewer, Hand
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
(Footwear) sews out-soles to shoes by
Code 7536
hand using sole-stitching awl (tool) and
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers
waxed cords. Collects out-soles and shoes
to be stitched together. Sorts out thread,
7536.1700
twists it into cord and draws it through
wax ball to strengthen it. Positions outsole Trimmer, Hand
to shoe and marks guide line for stitching
VOLUME II B 293
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Trimmer, Hand (Footwear) trims and Saddler; Saddle Marker makes new or
smoothens edges of soles and heels of repairs and adjusts old saddles. Cuts
shoes using hand knives, glass pieces and needed parts out of leather required size
sand paper. Examines shoe and as per sample or pattern as guide quality
determines extent of trimming required. and size. Stitches pieces into various
Selects sharp edged glass pieces, knife and saddle components by hand. Prepares
sand paper. Trims edges of soles and heel saddle tree, web or woollen lining. Stuffs
of shoe with knife. Scrapes trimmed seat with sheep wool. Makes panels and
portions of shoe with glass piece and rubs fits different leather components to
it with sand paper to make trimmed saddle by stitching, riveting or tacking as
surface uniform and smooth. Checks necessary. Trims excess thread, leather or
trimming and scouring frequently while wool. Colours edges and cleans saddle
working to avoid damage to shoe and to with soap. Repairs old and defective
ensure correct finish. May do trimming saddles by changing parts, trimming,
and scouring by machine. May colour stitching and making necessary
edges of sole and heel with chemical dyes. adjustment. May design new patterns.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 7536
Code 7536 Title Shoemakers and Related Workers
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers
7536.2000
7536.1800 Leather Cutter, Hand
Harness Maker
Leather Cutter, Hand (Harness and Saddle
Harness Maker makes and repairs harness Making) cuts leather pieces for use in
by cutting, fitting and stitching parts making harness and saddles. Places
together. Cuts various parts from leather pattern on hade and marks around with
stock according to design or pattern. Gives pencil. Cuts on marked lines, using
leather required colour and forms it by saddlers knife (rapi). May cut leather
shaping; riveting, and trimming. Sews pieces for other uses.
parts by hand or machine. Attaches
buckles, rings and other metal devices to ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
strap ends by looping over ends by Code 7536
stitching or riveting. Punches buckle holes Title Shoemakers and Related Workers
in strap. Applies dressing to harness by
hand. May repair items. May design 7536.2100
patterns.
Stitcher, Hand
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Stitcher, Hand; Mochi (Harness and Saddle
Code 7536
Making) makes and repairs leather belts
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers
and sews different leather parts of
harness and saddlery. Selects leather and
7536.1900
marks portion to be cut, using sample or
Saddler pattern. Skives leather at seams and pricks
marks on it to guide sewing. Applies wax
VOLUME II B 294
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
on thread and leather to facilitate Glues together corresponding parts of
stitching. Stitches pieces together with cardboard and basic material. Assembles
waxed thread to form required part for sections by gluing, machine sewing,
harness and saddle. Finishes side of riveting and otherwise fastening, affixes
leather using edging tool, creases line with attachments such as rings, gussets,
hot creasing tool for decoration and hand buckles, locks and handles. Applies dyes,
punches holes where necessary. Affixes and polishes and buffs. May design or
buckles and metal parts, scrapes or cuts copy patterns. May repair damaged
away extraneous material and dresses and articles. May finish edges of material and
treats leather parts with leather soap, oil, apply decorative marking by using heated
etc. to effect finished appearance. Applies edging and creasing tools.
required colour and polishes to high
finish. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7536
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Shoemakers and Related Workers
Code 7536
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers 7536.2400
Purse Maker
7536.2200
Assembler, Hand Purse Maker; Wallet Maker; Document
Case Maker makes purses, hand-bags,
Assembler, Hand (Harness and Saddle wallets, document cases, etc. from
Making) joins leather parts to make leather, rexine, plastic or other synthetic
harness and saddlery products. Skives material. Marks measurements of
(tapers) portions to be joined. Applies wax different parts of article to be made on
to facilitate stitching. Joins and assembles sheet of leather, plastic or other synthetic
parts by hand stitching or nailing. Finishes material and cuts them out with pair of
sides of leather with edging tool. May put scissors or rapi. Skives parts where
creasing lines on leather with hot creasing necessary using skiving knife. Cuts grooves
tool. May punch and bore fastening holes, along edges and folds parts as required.
and may give colour finish to assembled Joins parts together with glue and stitches
parts. May operate pricking machine. them along grooves on machine or by
hand awl and cord making lock-stitches.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Attaches handles, locks, straps, buttons,
Code 7536 etc., and pastes lining cloth from inside.
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers May perform decorative stitching where
required. May attach steel frames.
7536.2300
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Suitcase Maker
Code 7536
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers
Suit Case Maker makes suitcases, attache
cases and similar articles from leather or
7536.2500
synthetic material. Cuts two sets of
component parts, one from leather or Whip Maker
other basic material to be used and other
from cardboard, using guides or patterns.
VOLUME II B 295
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Whip Maker makes leather whips by Horn Comb Maker (Hand) makes horn
interlacing leather strips. Cuts leather combs from buffalo horns by using hand
strip of required length, width, and grelity tools. Selects horns to suit requirements.
into four strips leaving some portion Marks and saws them to required sizes.
uncut at end for handle. Trims, smoothens Scraps out outer rough layer, heats pieces
and interlaces strips and adds wax to hold in oven to make these soft, applies oil on
them together. Shapes handle to heated pieces, places them in wooden
complete whip. Colours and polishes mould and rolls cylindrical wooden rod by
entire whip. hand to straighten them; shapes pieces to
desired size and thickness by planing and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: cutting using adze and hand saw; marks
Code 7536 edges to cut teeth and saws teeth at equal
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers distances to required depth; sharpens
teeth edges with file; smoothens surface
7536.2600 with sand paper and applies wax to shine
and finish. Sharpens his own tools. May
Belt Maker
make other fancy horn products.
Belt Maker makes and repairs leather
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
belts, both for personal and industrial use.
Code 7536
Follows sample or instructions and marks
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers
and cuts off needed leather pieces from
roll. Skives (tapers) ends when pieces
7536.9900
must be joined. Sews parts together, using
waxed thread and awl to punch holes. Shoe Maker and Related Workers,
Uses heated edging and creasing tools to Other
aid in forming and decorating belt and
hand tools to attach buckles, metal Shoe Makers and Related Workers, Other
fixtures, and other parts. Trims belts with include all other shoe makers and related
knife (rapi) and finishes it, by treating with workers who are engaged in making and
oil, dyeing; and buffing. May make or repairing standard or special footwear
repair canvas belts by stitching on leather and, except for leather garments, hats and
parts, buckles and metal fixtures. May gloves, make natural or synthetic leather
design new belts for personal use. May articles, such as luggage, handbags, and
polish metal fixtures. May operate leather belts, or participate in the manufacture of
machines. May be designated as BELT shoes and related goods not elsewhere
MAN if engaged in repairing belts, classified. Plant and Machine Operators
installing them on motors and machinery, and Assemblers operate and monitor
and fixing fasteners in factory or industrial and agricultural machinery and
workshop. equipment on the spot or by remote
control, drive and operate trains, motor
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: vehicles and mobile machinery and
Code 7536 equipment, or assemble products from
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers component parts according to strict
specifications and procedures.
7536.2700
Horn Comb Maker (Hand) ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 296
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Code 7536 Diver, Pearl dives to sea bed to collect
Title Shoemakers and Related Workers pearl oysters or chanks. Sets sail in boat
and goes long distances on sea usually
Group 754 along with other divers, Rock Pilot and
Man Duck. Removes sails of boat and
Other Craft and Related Workers anchors it in sea as directed by Rock Pilot.
Dives to sea bed (50 to 60 feet in depth)
by holding one end of rope, tied with
Other craft and related workers work
heavy weight which is released into sea by
under the surface of water, using
Man Duck or someone else in boat.
underwater breathing apparatus; position,
Releases hold on rope on reaching sea-
assemble, and detonate explosives;
bed, gathers by hand pearl oysters or
inspect and test, raw materials,
chanks, and fills them in bag tied to his
manufactured components and products;
waist. Returns to surface of sea and hands
remove unwanted organisms to prevent
over oysters or chanks to mate in boat.
damage to crops and buildings and other
Repeats process to collect more oysters or
structures.
chanks. May do chank diving during off
seasons. May do deep sea fishing using
different types of nets during off seasons.
Occupations in this Group are classified
May operate power driven boats for
into the following Families:
fishing in deep sea waters.
7541 Underwater Divers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
7542 Shotfirers and Blasters
Code 7541
7543 Product Graders and Testers
Title Underwater Divers
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
7544 Fumigators and Other Pest and
7541.0200
Weed Controllers
Diver, Chank
7549 Craft and Related Workers, Not
Elsewhere Classified
Diver, Chank dives to sea bed to collect
chanks used for making bangles and like
articles. Sets sail on boat and goes out to
Family 7541
sea along with other divers, Rock Pilot and
Underwater Divers Man Duck. Removes sail and anchors boat
in Sea as directed by Rock Pilot. Holds one
end of rope, fixed with heavy weight and
Underwater divers work under the surface
released into sea and dives to sea bed.
of water, using underwater breathing
Releases hold on rope, collects chanks by
apparatus to inspect, install, repair, and
hand and fills them in bag tied to waist.
remove equipment and structures,
Returns to surface, hands over collection
conduct tests or experiments, rig
to mate in boat and repeats operation.
explosives, photograph structures or
May do pearl diving during pearl diving
marine life or find and recover missing
seasons. May operate power driven boats
items and persons.
and do deep sea fishing.
7541.0100
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Diver, Pearl
VOLUME II B 297
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Code 7541 Seaweed Gatherer collects by hand, from
Title Underwater Divers bottom of sea, different varieties of sea-
weed used for medicinal purposes. Dives
7541.0300 to floor of sea (in shallow waters). Pulls
Coral Breaker out sea-weed attached to rocks and stores
in boat. May collect sponges if required.
May also fish in deep waters and catch
Coral Breaker dives to sea-bed to break
fish using different kinds of nets or fishing
and collect corals using crow bar or sharp
tackles.
tool. Goes singly or with groups of
Fishermen in boats to places where coral
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
exists. Dives to sea bed (8 to 10 feet in
depth) taking crow bar or sharp tool. Code 7541
Breaks blocks of coral found attached to Title Underwater Divers
rocks with crow bar or other sharp tool.
Lifts released corals to surface, loads them 7541.0600
in boat and brings them to shore. May Dress Diver
also fish in deep waters and catch fish
using different types of nets. Dress Diver dives and works below surface
of water, using scuba gear (self-contained
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: under water breathing apparatus) or in
Code 7541 diving suit with airline extending to
Title Underwater Divers surface, to inspect, repair, remove and
install equipment and structures. Puts on
7541.0400 diving suit with airline extending to
Shell Gatherer surface or equips with scuba gear and
descends into water with aid of helper;
inspects docks, and bottoms and
Shell Gatherer dives to sea-bed and
propellers of ships; communicates with
collects or gathers by hand molluscs,
surface by signal line or telephone; repairs
crustaceans and other fancy shells. Dives
vessels below waterline, replacing missing
to sea-bed (20 feet in depth) and gathers
or leaking rivets with bolts; caulk leaks in
by hand different types of shells such as
ships; cleans debris from intake and
clams, oysters, mussels, crabs etc. Comes
discharge strainers; assists in salvage of
to surface with catch and stores them.
parts of wrecked ships and lost articles
Repeats process as required. May gather
under-water. May cut and weld steel
sponges if desired. May operate power
using oxyacetylene cutting torch and arc-
driven boats and fish in deep waters. May
welding equipment.
wash and clean shells. May go to sea
shore at low tide and collect shell fish,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
crabs etc. from inshore area.
Code 7541
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Underwater Divers
Code 7541
7541.0700
Title Underwater Divers
Skin Diver
7541.0500
Seaweed Gatherer
VOLUME II B 298
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Skin Diver dives into sea water for Shot Firer; Blaster; Dynamite Man
underwater examination of keel of ship, conducts blasting operations in mines and
propellers, pipes, sandpipes and hopper quarries by charging drilled holes with
doors of dredges etc., for suspected requisite amount of explosives. Examines
breakage or leakage and reports defects. holes and areas to be blasted. Ensures
Receives order from supervisors and goes that shot holes are properly drilled and
to spot where diving is required, on cleaned before charging. Determines
launch. Ascertains depth of water by quantity and type of explosive to be used;
putting sounding lines and judges whether loads shot hole with cartridges of
skin diving is feasible. Dives into water by explosive. Stems hole with clay, sand or
holding on rope attached with heavy other suitable stemming to prevent shot
weight (sinker) and lowered into bottom from blowing out. Signals Shot Firer
of water and reports defects to Operative nearby to take safety measures.
supervisors. Rectifies minor defects and Couples fuse or cable to detonator lead.
removes obstructions while under water, Splits end of fuses with knife or connects
if possible. cable to electric exploder. Lights fuse or
operates key of exploder to ignite
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: explosive. Follows signal and restrains
Code 7541 entry of workers at place of explosion
Title Underwater Divers before exploding and until atmosphere in
area is free from dust, smoke or fumes.
7541.9900 Directs Stone Duster to spread stone dust
over roof floor and sides of roadways for
Underwater Divers, Other
suppressing coal dust explosives. Takes
prescribed precautions in case of misfire.
Underwater Workers, other include
Maintains logbook for recording quantity
workers who work under water, dressed
of explosive used, number of shots fired
in scuba gear or diving suit, to inspect,
and misfired, if any. May drill shot holes in
install, repair, and remove equipment and
quarries and mines using pneumatic or
structures not elsewhere classified.
hand drills.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7542
Code 7541
Title ShotFirers and Blasters
Title Underwater Divers
7542.0101
Family 7542
Person Handling Explosives
Shotfirers and Blasters
Persons handling explosives, in open cast
Shotfirers and blasters, position,
mines, is a part of the blasters sub-
assemble, and detonate explosives at
category. The individual performing this
mining, quarrying and demolition sites.
role facilitates mining operations by
cautiously storing, transporting and
7542.0100 handling explosives used for blasting in
Shot Firer mines. Controlled blasting techniques are
used to remove debris and over-burden in
VOLUME II B 299
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
order to make way for coal or other with knife. Removes waste rock from
metals. crude mica pieces by manually splitting
The nature of this job requires employees into layers with hand or knife. Examines
to follow extensive safety precautions mica blocks visually for damages, stains
therefore the individual has to be etc. and removes defects by chipping
experienced and trained in safety them out with knife. May dress mica
procedures and guidelines for mining blocks with sickle to remove impurities
operations prescribed by DGMS. and inferior mica.
Qualification Pack Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference MIN/Q 0405 Code 7542
QP NOS Name Person Handling Title Shot Firerers and Blasters
Explosives
NSQF Level #N/A
7542.0400
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Sickle Dresser, Mica
Code
Title
Sickle Dresser, Mica; Cutter, Mica dresses
cobbed mica blocks by chipping out
7542.0200
broken and damaged portions with sickle
Safety Lamp Checker for further processing. Examines mica
blocks visually to detect defects, stains,
Safety Lamp Checker checks locks and air etc. and determines damaged and broken
leakages of miners’ safety lamps and portions to be dressed. Rifts defective
searches persons against carrying any layers, if necessary, and dresses it to
igniting material before going different sizes by chipping out broken and
underground. Checks miners’ safety lamps damaged portions with sickle. May do
at pithead by blowing them with knife dressing and grading of mica blocks.
compressed air jet to ensure that they are
properly locked and there is no leakage. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Searches persons going underground Code 7542
against carrying any contrabands. May Title Shot Firerers and Blasters
keep count of number of men
underground by checking number of 7542.0500
lamps issued and checked.
Screener, Mica
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Screener, Mica screens out loose split
Code 7542
mica to desired sizes using rope-mesh-
Title Shot Firer and Blasters
screen. Positions screen in inclined
position. Drops loose split mica leaves at
7542.0300
upper end of screen and shakes it with
Cobber, Mica attached rope to allow small sized leaves
to drop through screen holes and to get
Cobber, Mica; Rifter, Mica; Shearer, Mica larger sized leaves collected at its foot.
separates waste rock and inferior quality Removes large sized mica leaves from
mica from crude mica pieces by hand or
VOLUME II B 300
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
screen frame for further processing or graded mica blocks with double-edged
packing. knife.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7542 Code 7542
Title Shot Firerers and Blasters Title Shot Firerers and Blasters
7542.0600 7542.0800
Knife Dresser, Mica Deep Cell Attendant
Knife Dresser, Mica dresses sickle dressed Deep Cell Attendant; Flotation Man
mica blocks by slicing broken or damaged controls floatation process in
edges with knife. Weighs sickle dressed concentration plant to recover copper
mica blocks. Examines them visually to from pulp (pulverized ore mixed with
detect stains, damages, etc. Dresses out water). Measures density and alkalinity of
blocks of desired sizes by slicing damaged pulp using meters and indicators to
edges with knife, ensuring minimum ensure proper floatation. Regulates
possible wastage. Weighs dressed mica airflow into concentration plant to agitate
blocks to determine amount of resulting pulp and regulates water supply into cells
wastage. May sort and grade dressed mica as guided. Records data of pulp density,
blocks. reagent feed, alkalinity, airflow etc. and
submits them to appropriate authority.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7542 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Shot Firerers and Blasters Code 7542
Title Shot Firerers and Blasters
7542.0700
Film Splitter, Mica 7542.9900
Shot Firers and Blasters, Other
Film Splitter, Mica; Condenser, Mica splits
dressed and graded mica blocks into films Shot Firers and Blasters, other perform
of desired thickness by hand or using variety of routine and low skilled tasks
double edged knife. Examines blocks to such as carrying explosive, detonator and
determine uniformity of dressing and re- fuses holding light or torch for Shot Firer
splits them, if necessary by hand or knife cleaning holes and danger areas,
into films of desired uniform thickness. conveying messages of accident and
Measures thickness of films with misfire, picking shot holes with explosives,
micrometre and sorts them into pliers preparing clay balls, cleaning and dressing
according to thickness. Cuts films to loose stuff etc. and may be designated as
specified shape and measures area with Explosive Carriers carries explosive in
gauges to ensure conformity with rocked containers. Short Fire Helper;
specification. May be designated as Loose Blaster Helper assists shot Fire in charging
Splitter if engaged in splitting up loose holes and guarding place of work etc.
mica blocks into leaves by hand and as Stone Duster spreads stone dust over
Book Form Splitter if engaged in splitting roof, floor and sides of roadways for
suppressing coal dust explosions.
VOLUME II B 301
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 7543.0201
Code 7542 QC Executive-Sewing Line
Title Shot Firerers and Blasters
QC Executive-Sewing Line is responsible
Family 7543 for ensuring that physical inspections are
Product Graders and Testers conducted at all stages of production to
(Excluding Food and Beverages) secure quality and check that all technical
details are received; verified and signed
off prior to starting production. QC
Product graders and testers (except foods
executive also establishes quality plans,
and beverages) inspect, test, sort, sample,
parameters and inspection systems,
and weigh raw materials, manufactured
records deviations and sends feedback to
components and non-comestible goods
the concerned department.
produced or sold, to ensure compliance
with quality standards and to identify
Qualification Pack Details:
defects, wear, and deviations from
QP NOS Reference AMH/Q1401
specifications, and to grade and classify
QP NOS Name QC Executive-
them according to their quality.
Sewing Line
NSQF Level 5
7543.0101
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Cloth Examiner/Fabric Checker
Code 7543
Title Product Graders and Testers
Cloth Examiner; Cut Looker; Table Folder;
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
Piece Examiner (Cotton Textile) examines
cloth received from Folder, Machine for
7543.0202
defects and checks width and yard-age.
Quality Assessor
Compares quality (sometimes using a
Quality Assessor should be able to carry
magnifying glass) and yardage etc. of each
out Quality control/Quality assurance
piece of cloth with list supplied to him and
processes, understanding product and
notes discrepancies. Checks every fold for
processes required at various stages of
defects and puts aside defective cloth to
production for meeting the expectations
be shown to Weaver Power loom. Marks
of final customers.
yardage, quality and his own number on
cloth with pencil.
Qualification Pack Details:
Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Reference AMH/Q1701
QP NOS Name Quality Assessor
QP NOS Reference AMH/Q0101
NSQF Level 5
QP NOS Name Fabric Checker
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 7543
Title Product Graders and Testers
Code 7543
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
Title Product Graders and Testers
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
7543.0300
VOLUME II B 302
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Examiner, (Footwear)/Quality Title Product Graders and Testers
Controller (Excluding Food and Beverages)
7543.0302
Examiner (Footwear) examines finished
and unfinished shoes and shoe Inline Checker
components for faults. Inspects items for
defects such as irregularity of surface, In-Line checker is an important job-role
misplaced or incompletely driven tacks, associated with Apparel sector. The
uneven or defective stitching, improperly primary responsibility of a checker is to
proportioned toe-tip. Returns items with identify the faults in the fabrics, cut
major defects for reprocessing. May components and garment parts through
correct minor defects with hand tools. visual inspection.
May be designated according to part of
shoe inspected or department in which Qualification Pack Details:
employed such as HEEL EXAMINER QP NOS Reference AMH/Q0102
(FOOTWEAR), LINING EXAMINER QP NOS Name In-Line checker
(FOOTWEAR), UPPER EXAMINER NSQF Level 3
(FOOTWEAR), CLOSING EXAMINER
(FOOTWEAR), FINAL EXAMINER ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
(FOOTWEAR), etc.
Code 7543
Title Product Graders and Testers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
Code 7543
Title Product Graders and Testers 7543.0400
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
Examiner, Dry Cleaning/Fabric
Inspection Operator
7543.0301
Examiner, Dry-cleaning examines
Measurement Checker
garments, textile furnishings or any other
similar articles after dry-cleaning to detect
Measurement Checker inspects the
and remove spots, stains or damage
accuracy of the dimensions of the stitched
caused by process. Examines garments
parts and the finished apparel. The
after dry cleaning for defects and damage.
primary responsibility of a Measurement
Passes on defective articles to Spot
checker is to measure all the dimension of
Remover or to Darner according to nature
the apparel and ensure they are free from
of defect for mending. May get garments
defects.
washed or dry-cleaned afresh.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Qualification Pack Details:
Code 7543
QP NOS Reference AMH/Q0103
Title Product Graders and Testers
QP NOS Name Measurement
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
Checker
NSQF Level 4
7543.0500
Examiner, Wood Working
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7543
VOLUME II B 303
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Examiner, Wood Working; Viewer Wood modules and ensure QC passed
Working; Wood Grader examines wood components is used for hardware
and finished wooden articles on assembling.
completion or at different stages of
production and ensures adherence to Qualification Pack Details:
prescribed tolerances and specifications. QP NOS Reference ELE/Q4401
Studies drawings and specifications and QP NOS Name Incoming QC
notes types of articles to be made. Technician
Examines type and quality of wood for NSQF Level 5
grains, knots etc. for grading and to
ensure adherence to prescribed ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
specifications. Checks marking, sawing,
Code 7543
shaping, joining, setting etc. along with
Title Product Graders and Testers
drawing or sample using foot rule,
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
callipers and other instruments at various
stages of production and ensures required
7543.0702
finish of completed article. Records
Final Product QC Technician
defects where noticed, rejects defective
pieces or suggests rectifications, if
Final Product Quality Check Technician
possible. May check machine set up,
checks functional output of the assembled
blending of patches, inlaying, seasoning of
hardware equipment against pre-defined
wood and like factors for manufacture of
specifications. The individual at work is
particular items such as sports goods,
responsible for checking the various
cabinets, furniture, rifle butts etc. May
functions of the hardware equipment and
estimate material and labour cost.
ensure it meets the defined specifications.
The individual performs physical and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
functional quality checks on the
Code 7543
assembled product and ensure only QC
Title Product Graders and Testers
passed equipment is sent for packing.
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
Qualification Pack Details:
7543.0701
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q4402
Incoming QC Technician
QP NOS Name Final Product QC
Technician
Incoming Quality Check Technician checks
NSQF Level 4
sub-assemblies and modules received
from suppliers for physical and functional
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
match of specifications to ensure that
Code 7543
defect-free components are used in
Title Product Graders and Testers
production. The individual at work is
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
responsible for checking quality check on
the components and modules procured
7543.0801
from suppliers for production of hardware
Functional Tester
equipment. The individual performs
physical and functional quality check
processes on the components and Functional Tester is responsible for
checking functions of manufactured
VOLUME II B 304
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
industrial equipment such as UPS, UPS, inverter, PLC, control panel, and
inverter, energy meter, PLC, oscilloscope, other units under extreme specified
control panel. The individual at work tests conditions to check stress test pass or
specified functions of every product being failure rate.
assembled on the production line.
Qualification Pack Details:
Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7404
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7401 QP NOS Name Reliability Tester
QP NOS Name Functional Tester NSQF Level 3
NSQF Level 3
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 7543
Code 7543 Title Product Graders and Testers
Title Product Graders and Testers (Excluding Food and Beverages)
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
7543.0804
7543.0802 Safety Testing Technician
Performance Tester
Safety Testing Technician is also called,
Performance Tester checks samples of the ‘Safety Inspector’, the Safety Tester is
final assembled product for key responsible for assuring that the appliance
performance parameters under simulated meets prescribed safety standards. The
conditions. The individual at work tests individual at work, tests safety parameters
performance parameters of UPS, energy of the assembled UPS, inverter, energy
meter, PLC and other industrial meter, PLC, oscilloscope, control panel
equipment for a randomly selected and automation units as per BIS or other
sample of products and ensures that they standards.
are within acceptable ranges.
Qualification Pack Details:
Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7403
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7402 QP NOS Name Safety Testing
QP NOS Name Performance Tester Technician
NSQF Level 4 NSQF Level 3
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7543 Code 7543
Title Product Graders and Testers Title Product Graders and Testers
(Excluding Food and Beverages) (Excluding Food and Beverages)
7543.0803 7543.0901
Reliability Tester Functional Tester-Medical Devices
Reliability Tester is responsible for Functional Tester conducts tests on
ensuring the long term performance of a medical devices at different stages of the
product. The individual at work, tests the manufacturing process in order to check
modules such as power supply or PCB of their conformance with the device’s
VOLUME II B 305
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
defined performance parameters. The Functional Tester TV is also called, ‘In-line
individual at work is responsible for Product Inspector’ the Functional Tester is
testing the medical devices for pre- responsible for quality check during
defined functional specifications, quality television set assembly. The individual at
parameters and check them against the work tests all the specified functions of
performance parameters of that device. each television set assembled on the line.
The individual returns any defective
Qualification Pack Details: product or module to the in-line repair
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7803 team.
QP NOS Name Functional Tester-
Medical Devices Qualification Pack Details:
NSQF Level 4 QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3602
QP NOS Name Functional Tester-
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: TV
Code 7543 NSQF Level 4
Title Product Graders and Testers
(Excluding Food and Beverages) ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7543
7543.1001 Title Product Graders and Testers
Functional Tester-RAC (Excluding Food and Beverages)
7543.1003
Functional Tester-RAC is also called,
‘Product Inspector’, the Functional Tester Safety Testing Technician-TV
checks all the functions of the
manufactured product before dispatch. Safety Testing Technician-TV is also called,
The individual at work tests all the ‘Safety Inspector’, is responsible for
functions of the assembled product as per assuring that the TV set meets prescribed
product specifications, either on sample safety standards. The individual at work,
or entire lot. Any defective product tests safety parameters of the assembled
passed back on to the in-line repair team. refrigerator or air conditioner or washing
machine or other home appliances as per
Qualification Pack Details: BIS, ISI or other standards.
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3601
QP NOS Name Functional Tester- Qualification Pack Details:
RAC QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3603
NSQF Level 4 QP NOS Name Safety Testing
Technician-TV
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: NSQF Level 3
Code 7543
Title Product Graders and Testers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
(Excluding Food and Beverages) Code 7543
Title Product Graders and Testers
7543.1002 (Excluding Food and Beverages)
Functional Tester-TV
7543.1004
Safety Testing Technician-RACWO
VOLUME II B 306
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Safety Testing Technician-RACWO is also Title Product Graders and Testers
called, ‘Safety Inspector’, the Safety (Excluding Food and Beverages)
Testing Technician is responsible for
assuring that the appliance meets 7543.1006
prescribed safety standards. The Performance Tester-TV
individual at work, tests safety parameters
of the assembled refrigerator or air
Performance Tester-TV is also called,
conditioner or washing machine or other
‘Performance Inspector’, responsible for
home appliances as per BIS or other
checking audio-visual performance
standards.
aspects of TV with respect to picture and
sound quality as per guaranteed
Qualification Pack Details:
specifications. The individual at work runs
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3605 simulated tests to check performance
QP NOS Name Safety Testing parameters of the TV set as per company
Technician-RACWO recommended or international standards.
NSQF Level 3
Qualification Pack Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3607
Code 7543 QP NOS Name Performance
Title Product Graders and Testers Tester-TV
(Excluding Food and Beverages) NSQF Level 4
7543.1005 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Performance Tester-RACW Code 7543
Title Product Graders and Testers
Performance Tester is responsible for (Excluding Food and Beverages)
checking energy consumption and
functional durability aspects of cooling, 7543.1101
heating or duty cycle of sample Testing Technician
refrigerator, air-conditioner, washing
machine and other home appliances as
Testing Technician is responsible for
per test standards such as ISO and
checking that the assembled and
company’s guarantee. The individual at
encapsulated component functions as per
work runs simulation tests on the
input and output specifications. The
appliance to check its performance and
individual at work operates the
reliability in terms of parameters such as
automated test machine or checks
energy consumption, temperature,
manually on jigs, the components for
vacuum and pressure, and duty cycle.
functioning as per specifications.
Qualification Pack Details:
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3606
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q1801
QP NOS Name Performance
QP NOS Name Testing Technician-
Tester-RACW
Active components
NSQF Level 4
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7543
Code 7543
VOLUME II B 307
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
Title Product Graders and Testers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
(Excluding Food and Beverages) Code 7543
Title Product Graders and Testers
7543.2001 (Excluding Food and Beverages)
Quality Inspector-forged, casted or
machined components 7543.3002
Quality Control Inspector-
Quality Inspector-forged, casted or Dimension check
machined components checks the forged,
casted and machined components for Quality Control Inspector-Dimension
both dimensional accuracy and for visual check carries out dimension checks to
quality at various stages of manufacture, ensure conformance to dimensions of
such as before production, intermediate rubber product.
and after production and recording the
results of the inspection during and after Qualification Pack Details:
the inspection activities.
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0418
QP NOS Name Quality Control
Qualification Pack Details:
Inspector-
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0601 Dimension check
QP NOS Name Quality Inspector- NSQF Level 4
forged, casted or
machined
components ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
NSQF Level #N/A
Code 7543
Title Product Graders and Testers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
Code 7543
Title Product Graders and Testers 7543.3003
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
Quality control Inspector-Extrusion
7543.3001
Quality Control Inspector-Extrusion in this
Quality Control Inspector-
role is responsible for controlling the
Calendering quality of the product during the extrusion
process.
Quality control Inspector-Calendering in
this role is responsible for controlling the Qualification Pack Details:
quality of the product during the QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0624
calendering process. QP NOS Name Quality Control
Inspector-Extrusion
Qualification Pack Details: NSQF Level 5
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0730
QP NOS Name Quality Control ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Inspector- Code 7543
Calendering Title Product Graders and Testers
NSQF Level #N/A (Excluding Food and Beverages)
VOLUME II B 308
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 7
7543.3004 7543.4001
Quality Control Inspector-Statistical Factory Compliance Auditor
process control
Factory Compliance Auditor is responsible
Quality Control Inspector-Statistical for conducting regular audits in the
process control carries out Statistical apparel factory to check if the unit is
process control by collecting different functioning in accordance to the industry
production related data and use regulations, standards and policies. The
appropriate technique to carry out Compliance Auditor prepares a detailed
statistical analysis. report of the audit findings with remarks
on system adequacy, system conformance
Qualification Pack Details: or deviation if any, and overall system
performance.
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0416
QP NOS Name Quality Control
Qualification Pack Details:
Inspector-Statistical
process control QP NOS Reference AMH/Q2201
NSQF Level #N/A QP NOS Name Factory Compliance
Auditor
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: NSQF Level #N/A
Code 7543
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Product Graders and Testers
(Excluding Food and Beverages) Code 7543
Title Product Graders and Testers
7543.3005 (Excluding Food and Beverages)
Quality Control Inspector-Visual
7543.5001
Inspection
Sampling Co-ordinator
Quality Control Inspector-Visual
Sampling Co-ordinator plans, handles and
Inspection is responsible for inspecting
monitors new product development,
the quality of rubber product visually and
regular follow up with all sampling like:
identify defects, if any.
proto sample, size sets, fit samples and
photo shoot samples.
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0417
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Name Quality Control
QP NOS Reference AMH/Q 1801
Inspector-Visual
QP NOS Name Sampling Co-
Inspection
ordinator
NSQF Level #N/A
NSQF Level #N/A
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 7543
Code 7543
Title Product Graders and Testers
Title Product Graders and Testers
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
(Excluding Food and Beverages)
VOLUME II B 309
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
7543.9900
Product Graders and Testers,
Others Division
8
Product Graders and Testers, Others
include graders and testers who inspect,
test, sort, sample, and weigh raw
materials, manufactured components and Plant and Machine Operators, and
non-comestible goods produced or sold, Assemblers
to ensure compliance with quality
standards not elsewhere classified.
Plant and Machine Operators, and
Assemblers operate and monitor
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
industrial and agricultural machinery and
Code 7543 equipment on the spot or by remote
Title Product Graders and Testers control, drive and operate trains, motor
(Excluding Food and Beverage vehicles and mobile machinery and
equipment, or assemble products from
component parts according to strict
Family 7544 specifications and procedures. The work
mainly calls for experience with and an
Fumigators and Other Pest and understanding of industrial and
Weed Controllers agricultural machinery and equipment as
well as an ability to cope with machine-
paced operations and to adapt to
Fumigators and other pest and weed
technological innovations.
controllers use chemicals to remove
Tasks performed by Plant and Machine
harmful insects, small animals, wild plants
Operators and Assemblers usually include:
and other unwanted organisms to prevent
operating and monitoring mining or other
damage to crops and to buildings and
industrial machinery and equipment for
other structures and their surroundings
processing metal, minerals, glass,
and to prevent health risks.
ceramics, wood, paper, or chemicals,;
operating and monitoring machinery and
Family 7549
equipment used to produce articles made
of metal, minerals, chemicals, rubber,
Craft and Related Workers, Not
plastics, wood, paper, textiles, fur, or
Elsewhere Classified
leather, and which process foodstuffs and
related products; driving and operating
This family covers craft and trade trains and motor vehicles; driving,
occupations not classified elsewhere in operating and monitoring mobile
industrial and agricultural machinery and
Division 7, Craft and related trades
equipment; assembling products from
workers. For instance, the family includes
component parts according to strict
those who mould, slice, grind and polish
specifications and procedures. Supervision
optical lenses. of other workers may be included.
VOLUME II B 310
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Occupations in this Division are classified Occupations in this Sub Division are
into the following Sub Divisions: classified into the following Groups:
81 Stationary Plant and 811 Mining and Mineral Processing
Machine Operators Plant Operators
82 Assemblers 812 Metal Processing and Finishing
83 Drivers and Mobile Plant Plant Operators
Operators 813 Chemical and Photographic
Products Plant and Machine
Operators
Sub Division 81
814 Rubber, Plastic and Paper Products
Stationary Plant and Machine
Machine Operators
Operators
815 Textile, Fur and Leather Products
Machine Operators
Stationary Plant and Machine Operators
816 Food and Related Products
operate and monitor, on the spot or by
Machine Operators
remote control, industrial plant and
817 Wood Processing and Paper
machinery and equipment that are
stationary, or for which mobility is not an
Making Plant Operators
integral part of operationThe work mainly 818 Other Stationary Plant and
calls for experience with and an Machine Operators
understanding of the industrial plant,
machinery or equipment being operated
Group 811
and monitored. Ability to cope with
Mining and Mineral Processing
machine-paced operations and to adapt
Plant Operators
to innovations in machinery and
Mining and Mineral Processing Plant
equipment is often required.
Operators operate and monitor plant and
Tasks performed by workers in this sub-
machinery which extract rock and
major group usually include: setting up,
minerals from the earth, process minerals
operating and monitoring a variety
and stone, drill wells and bores, and
stationary plant and machinery; detecting
manufacture and finish cement and stone
malfunctions and taking corrective action;
products.
examining outputs for defects and
conformity to specifications and adjusting
Occupations in this Group are classified
machine settings accordingly; performing
into the following Families:
maintenance, repairs and cleaning;
recording data and maintaining
production records. Supervision of other 8111 Miners and Quarriers
workers may be included. 8112 Mineral and Stone Processing
Plant Operators
8113 Well Drillers and Borers and
Related Workers
8114 Cement, Stone and Other Mineral
Products Machine Operators
VOLUME II B 311
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Family 8111 directed according to depth and diameter
Miners and Quarriers of hole to be drilled. Operates drill to bore
holes of required depth by moving
machine backward and forward, if
Miners and Quarriers operate plant,
necessary, moves machines to other
machinery and hand tools to extract rock,
points and repeats operations to make
minerals and non-metallic deposits from
other holes. Replaces blunt or damaged
underground and surface mines and
cutting bits, if necessary. May operate
quarries.
jackhammer to drill holes. May sharpen
drill-bits.
8111.0100
Miner, Coal Cutting Machine ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8111
Miner, Coal Cutting Machine, Coal Cutting Title Miners and Quarriers
Machine Driver; Coal Cutting Machine
man sets and operates electric or 8111.0300
pneumatic coal cutting machine for
Waggon Driller
loosening coal working face for blasting by
undercut below seam up to specified
Waggon Driller; Churn Driller, Deep Hole
depth. Moves machine with accessories to
Driller operates waggon or churn drill to
working place with assistance of Mining
make deep holes of large diameters in
Operatives. Sets it in position to make
hard or soft rock faces for blasting. Installs
undercut below seam up to specified
and adjusts position of machine. Fits
depth. Manipulates levers to start motion
appropriate drill-bit in drilling machine.
of endless cutting chain on cutter bar and
Operates drilling machine at regulated
effect forward movement of machine.
feed, speed and pressure to drill hole.
Advances cutter bar into working face to
Stops machine and raises drilling rod out
cut coal and repeats operation to make
of hole when one bar length is drilled.
other cuts across or down side of working
Adds rod lengths as required and
face as desired. Lubricates, adjusts and
continues operation to drill hole up to
makes minor repairs to machine as
required depth. Replaces blunt or
required.
damaged drill bits as required. May do
minor running repairs to machine. May
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
also sharpen drill bit when required and if
Code 8111
possible.
Title Miners and Quarriers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8111.0200
Code 8111
Driller, Machine
Title Miners and Quarriers
Driller Machine; Machine Runner Driller, 8111.0400
Jack Hammer drills shot holes of required
Diamond Driller
depth and diameter according to marking
in coal minerals, metallic and non-metallic
Diamond Driller drills earth strata at
rock faces by electric or petrol engine or
specified site up to prescribed depth to
compressed air drilling machine as
locate or prospect underground minerals
VOLUME II B 312
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
using diamond drill. Installs machine at Code
specified site. Sets direction and angle of Title
drilling rod against working face. Controls
and regulates bit-pressure, rate of feed, 8111.0500
speed of drill and flow of water into hole Pick Miners
through bit. Adds rod lengths to drilling
bits as and when required. Drives metal
Pick Miner extracts coals diamond, metal
pipes and casing of pipes through hole at
ore etc. by cutting working face of mine
regular intervals to avoid caving. Submits
with pick axe where machine mining is not
core samples (extracted soil during
economical or possible. Examines working
drilling) for analysis. Keeps correct log
face. Cuts into seam on sides and floor
(records) of holes drilled and drills used.
using pick to loosen rock. Dresses roof and
May lubricate and make minor repairs to
sides of working face, when blasting is
machine.
complete to remove loosened rock.
Breaks bigger rock lumps into smaller size
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
fills basket with broken ore and loads ore
Code 8111 into mine cars for transportation to
Title Miners and Quarriers haulage point. May make undercut below
coal seam, clear under cut for drilling and
8111.0401 blasting and also push loaded cars to
Rig Mounted Drill Operator haulage point. May be designated as
MINER PICK AXE HAND CUT MINER, HAND
Rig Mounted Drill Operator drives and CUTTER, FLOOR COAL CUTTER in case of
operates a drill machine which is a self- coal mining and MINE DIGGER if engaged
propelled machine used to drill shallow as in diamond mining.
well as deep holes in the soil and rock for
blasting or for quarry operations. The ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
holes are caused by crushing under Code 8111
percussion and/or by drill bit rotation Title Miners and Quarriers
causing abrasion. The drill operates on
pneumatic hydraulic system and uses 8111.0600
compressed air as power source. Miner, Metal
Operating a drill is a specialized task that
can be safely performed only with
Miner, Metal extracts metal ores in
adequate training and experience. Drill
underground or open cast mines by
Operators are also responsible for
breaking blasted slabs, dressing roof sides
performing basic maintenance on the
and working face with crowbar, hammer,
machine.
shovel and pick axe. Strikes working face
with crowbar or pick-axe to loosen and
Qualification Pack Details:
drop metal ores. Cuts floor ores with pick-
QP NOS Reference MIN/Q 0402 axe and dresses sides properly. Breaks
QP NOS Name Rig Mounted Drill large pieces into smaller ones with sledge
Operator hammer, shovels metal ores into baskets
NSQF Level 4 and empties them into Chats (large tubes)
for onward transmission for processing.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: May drill hole in roof face using crowbar
VOLUME II B 313
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
and hammer to prepare working face for shot holes as well; and as MINER DE-
blasting. May separate ore from PILLARING if gets it done by Shot Firer.
impurities. May be designated as MUCKER
or MUCKING WORKER if engaged in ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
copper mines. Code 8111
Title Miners and Quarriers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8111 8111.0900
Title Miners and Quarriers Quarryman, Stone/Quarryman,
Non-metal
8111.0700
Miner, Mica
Quarryman, Stone; Miner Stone, extracts
various kinds of stone from quarries or
Miner, Mica extracts crude mica from
open pits. Removes loose soil and mud
working face in mica mine with chisel and
from surface and sides of blasted deposits
hammer after blasting. Strikes working
using shovel. Removes slabs of stones
face with chisel and hammer to extract
from earth with crowbar, wedge or pick
mica after it has been loosened by
and breaks them into convenient size
blasting. Dresses roof and sides to extract
using sledge hammer Dresses rough
loosened mica blocks. May fill bags with
surface of stone and granite blocks by
mica blocks for transportation to factory.
chipping and cuts them as instructed to
May drill holes in working face for
required shape and size. May drill shot
blasting. May blast mica bearing veins
holes in quarry face for blasting. May sort
with explosives during hand cutting.
out ore and mineral according to quality.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8111
Code 8111
Title Miners and Quarriers
Title Miners and Quarriers
8111.0800
8111.1000
Miner, Coal
Quarryman, Other
Miner. Coal; Coal Cutter; Coal Puller Quarryman, other extracts china clay, lime
extracts coal from coal pillars inside mines stone, fire clay and other non-metal
using crowbar and pick-axe after coal deposits from quarry by cutting breaking
pillars are blasted by Shot Firer. Strikes etc. using pick axe, crow bar, spade and
sides of pillar with pick-axe or crowbar to other tools. Digs soil to reach deposits.
loosen and drop coal from pillars. Cuts Drills specified shot holes of required
working face with pick-axe and dresses depth in rock faces for blasting by SHOT
hanging coal from roof and sides with FIRER. Extracts lime stone, china clay, fire
crowbar. Breaks coal lumps to convenient clay and other deposits from blasted
sizes and shovels them into tubs. May set quarry faces using shovel pick axe,
loaded tubs on tram lines. May be crowbar etc. Breaks large pieces in to
designated as C. P. MINER (Coal Pillar convenient size with hammer and gets
Mines) if does charging and blasting of them removed or specified place. May
charge and ignite explosive. May
VOLUME II B 314
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
specialize in extracting china clay using underground and makes hole to desired
pick axe, shove land spade. May carry depth according to diameter to prop,
basket filled with china clay to specified using power drill, crow bar, chisel hammer
place. May dewater quarry with pump or etc. Removes rubbish and erects roof
bucket, remove mud and perform alike supports. May drill shot holes for bringing
duties if required. down roof or blowing floor. May build
roadways and pack walls of air ways.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8111 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Miners and Quarriers Code 8111
Title Miners and Quarriers
8111.1100
Main Header Colliery 8111.1300
Roof Bolter, Mining
Main Header, Colliery construct narrow
roads for opening new works, cuts air Roof Bolter, Mining operates machinery
passages and blocks old roads in coal to install roof support bolts in
mine. Receives instructions on dimension underground mine. Drill bolt holes into
and location of gallery (Tunnel or passage roofs at specified distances from ribs or
in coal mine) to open new work. Cuts adjacent bolts. Forces bolts into holes,
tunnel passage according to specification using hydraulic mechanisms of self-
using mechanical devices and hand tools, propelled bolting machines. Installs truss
inserting pipe range for pumping bolts traversing entire ceiling spans.
operations, exploring strata to know Positions bolting machines, and insert drill
behaviour of roof, etc. Cuts air passages bits into chucks. Positions safety jacks to
and blocks old roads by drilling, blasting support underground mine roofs until
etc. Shovels coal, rock and refuse from bolts can be installed. Removes drill bits
corners and working areas into cars to from chucks after drilling holes, then
prevent interference with mining inserts bolts into chucks. Rotates chucks
operations and circulation of air. May also to turn bolts and open expansion heads
be engaged in shaft sinking. against rock formations. Tests bolts for
specified tension, using torque wrenches.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Tightens ends of anchored truss bolts,
Code 8111 using turnbuckles.
Title Miners and Quarriers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8111.1200 Code 8111
Stone Cutter, Mines Title Miners and Quarriers
8111.1400
Stone Cutter, Mines makes holes or cuts
stone or rock faces in mine with machine Mine Cutting and Channelling
or hand tools such as power drill, crowbar, Machine Operator
chisel etc. for putting up support or
constructing brick foundation. Marks Mine Cutting and Channelling Machine
portion of roof and footwall to be cut for Operator operates machinery, such as
insertion of prop. Cuts face of hitches longwall shears, plows, and cutting
VOLUME II B 315
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
machines to cut or channel along the face support them. Collects material near work
or seams of coal mines, stone quarries, or site and examines roof and sidewalls of
other mining surfaces to facilitate haulage-ways, air passages, shafts,
blasting, separating, or removing minerals galleries etc. inside mine. Takes
or materials from mines or from the measurements off from floor to roof to
earth's surface. Cuts slots along working decide height of prop required. Cuts props
faces of coal, salt, or other non-metal and logs to required length. Erects props
deposits in order to facilitate blasting, by on secure foundation and tightens them
moving levers to start the machine and to against roof using rectangular blocks.
control the vertical reciprocating drills. Installs ladders, chutes, cribs and other
Determines locations, boundaries, and frame work to support roof and walls
depths of holes or channels to be cut. using saw, axes, hatchet, hammer, spikes
Drives mobile, truck-mounted, or track- and wedges as necessary. Ensures
mounted drilling or cutting machine in removal of woodcuttings from work place.
mines and quarries or on construction May also drill holes in roof and walls for
sites. Moves controls to start and position timbering purposes and drive roof bolts.
drill cutters or torches, and to advance May remove or replace defective props.
tools into mines or quarry faces in order
to complete horizontal or vertical cuts. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Moves planer levers to control and adjust Code 8111
the movement of equipment, the speed, Title Miners and Quarriers
height, and depth of cuts, and to rotate
swivel cutting booms. Observes indicator 8111.1600
lights and gauges, and listen to machine
Creeperman, Colliery
operation in order to detect binding or
stoppage of tools or other equipment
Creeperman Colliery; Creeper Khalasi
problems. Repositions machines and
operates creeper (endless link chain with
move controls in order to make additional
catchers or conveyors) for raising coal
holes or cuts. Signals that machine plow
tubs on surface to higher level. Sets up
blades are properly positioned, using
link chain with conveyor at surface or
electronic buzzers or two-way radios.
from working face in mine. Joints
Charges and sets off explosives in blasting
conveyor sections on frames and connects
holes.
power unit or switches on. Regulates
conveyor or link chain tension by
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
operating controls. Tends chain to
Code 8111
transport coal or metal ore. Cleans,
Title Miners and Quarriers
lubricates and makes minor repairs to
conveyor and power unit as required. May
8111.1500
supervise Loaders who shovel material
Timberman, Mines into conveyor. May operate mechanical
scoop to lift material on to conveyor. May
Timber man, Mines; Timber Worker, keep conveyor track free from obstruction
Propping Worker examines roof and side to prevent jamming and damage.
walls of haulage-ways, air passages,
shafts, galleries, etc. inside mine and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
erects timber or steel props frames etc. to Code 8111
VOLUME II B 316
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Title Miners and Quarriers 8111.1900
Sampler, Mining/Sampler
8111.1700
Metal/Non-metal
Stowing Worker
Sampler, Mining marks metal bearing rock
Stowing Worker; Boxing Worker erects faces for cutting grooves, measures
props and barricades of bamboo mattings sample section, chisels out mineral
and hessian cloth around coal depillaring samples from grooves and marks them for
areas for compactly filling them with sand, analysis. Determines and marks sample
to prevent caving in and collapsing of roof. section according to rock surface and
Examines area around coal pillar to erect grades of mineralisation for groove
roof support. Collects materials such as cutting. Examines grooves cut by groove
props, barricades to bamboo mattings, cutter along mineral bearing rock faces
hessian cloth, etc. Cuts them to required and gets defective cutting re-cut by
sizes and erects them to support roof. groove cutter along mineral bearing rock
Couples up sand stowing pipes and signals faces and gets defective cutting re-cut by
to sand mixing chamber on surface to groove cutter. Checks groove distances
release flushing of sand and water. from fixed points using ladder and rope.
Observes sand filling operation till vacuum Cuts samples from grooves and different
is tightly packed to roof face and rendered section of mine to obtain representative
safe from collapsing. Signals to surface samples. Bags and marks sample with
sand chamber to stop release of slurry details of location and sends them to
(mixture of sand and water) when filling is laboratory for analysis. May estimate
complete. May build stonewall packs to quantity and grades of deposit contained
support roof. May recover supports. in marked position by taking necessary
measurements. May plot location of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: samples taken from working faces on
Code 8111 mine maps.
Title Miners and Quarriers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8111.1800 Code 8111
Packer, Rock Title Miners and Quarriers
Packer, Rock packs waste rocks compactly 8111.2000
against roof after extracting operations in Groove Cutter, Mining
mines to prevent it from collapsing. Sorts
waste rock from broken ore manually and Groove Cutter, Mining cuts groove of
packs them tightly against roof in drives, specified dimensions along marks made
iron-cuts or in stopes (working places) to by sampler for extracting sample from
prevent collapse and loosening of hanging metal bearing rock faces in mine. Marks
and broken ores. May assist Mucker in grooves along mineralised portion of rock
copper mines. face and cuts grooves by chipping
defective portion if necessary. Assists
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: sampler in cutting samples. May scrub and
Code 8111 wash grooves.
Title Miners and Quarriers
VOLUME II B 317
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Shaft Worker maintains cages, pulleys,
Code 8111 winding gears, etc. and ensures
Title Miners and Quarriers compliance of regulations for working of
hoisting system. Examines shafts and shaft
8111.2100 fittings, guide ropes, pulleys, cages, etc.
for efficient performance. Checks safety-
Bratticeman
hooks, safety plate, governor, fencing,
brakes, signal, banking lever, head gear,
Bratticeman; Brattice Worker installs
pulleys etc. to ensure smooth working of
partitions in mine for regulating
shaft. Locates faults and undertakes minor
circulation of air through passages to
repairs and replacements of defective
working places. Cuts timber props to
parts as necessary and maintains their
required size erects them along gallery at
records. May perform other fitting
required place and fixes brattices (made
operations of general nature.
from bamboo matting, canvas or mild
steel plate) on them. May also undertake
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
other kind of timberwork underground.
Code 8111
May also erect masonry structure to
Title Miners and Quarriers
control proper circulation of air.
8111.2400
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Banksman
Code 8111
Title Miners and Quarriers
8111.2200 Banksman; Ringer Bell; Ringer controls
movement cage at shaft top and directs
Driller, Hand
Winding Engine Driver and Onsetter for its
raising and lowering with men or material
Driller, Hand makes shot holes of required
by electrical or mechanical code signal
depth in coal, metallic and non-metallic
system. Adjusts catch inside cage and
rock-faces using crowbar, drill rods and
closes cage fencing for securing safety of
hammer. Examines marking for drilling on
men or material. Signals to On setter and
rock face. Sets crowbar against marking
Winding Engine Driver by means of
and gets it struck with heavy hammer by
electrical buzzer or bell system for
his co-worker, each taking his turn with
lowering and raising cage to transport
hammer, uses water while drilling to cool
men and materials at various levels.
drill rod and keep down dust, till hole of
Observes movement of cage and sets keps
required depth is made. Cleans shot hole
(Bearing up stops for supporting cage or
for charging with explosive. May drill shot
load at beginning or end of hoisting in
hole using drilling machine. May drill hole
shaft) by operating hand lever to rest or
singly using hand hammer and crowbar.
release cage from keps. Opens cage
fencing and unloads contents. Checks
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
fencing, keps, cage-doors, guide shoes,
Code 8111
chains, signal and reports irregularities to
Title Miners and Quarriers
superiors. May be designated as
ONSETTER if engaged at shaft bottom and
8111.2300
as BELLMAN or SIGNALMAN, MINES if
Shaft Worker
VOLUME II B 318
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
engaged, at winze (shaft sunk from one specified place or into chute or car
level to another in mine) or at landing. beneath. Reverses hoists, drags scraper
back for another load and repeats
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: process. Moves machine from place to
Code 8111 place in mine for operation as required.
Title Miners and Quarriers Repairs or replaces broken ropes,
lubricates pulleys and performs minor
8111.2500 running repairs to hoist and equipment.
May work as Mining Sirdar, if experienced
Jackman
and qualified, when required.
Jack Man; Cage Man, Mine gives signals
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
for movement of cages used to raise and
Code 8111
lower men, car and supplies between
Title Miners and Quarriers
various levels and surface of mines and
load and unload materials Directs
8111.2601
movement of cage by signalling to banks
man or hoist Driver by means of electric Sprinkler and Other Vehicle Driver
bell or buzzer system. Runs loaded car to
position near shaft and pushes them on to Sprinkler and Other Vehicle Driver in
cage. Pulls empty cars from cage and runs mining industry is an ancillary job role.
them on to station siding for distribution The individual assigned this role could be
in mines. May pull loaded cars of cage and driving a sprinkler truck to control dust on
replace them with empties. a haul-road or could be driving mining
personnel in an SUV or any other small
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: truck used to haul material. Besides
Code 8111 knowledge of driving fundamentals, the
Title Miners and Quarriers role requires the individual to know and
understand the basic of mining
8111.2600 operations, traffic rules to be followed in
the mining area and safety guidelines for
Scraper Driver, Mines
mining operations prescribed by DGMS.
Vehicle drivers are also responsible for
Scraper Driver, Mines; Scraper Operator,
performing basic maintenance on the
Mines; Scraper Loader Hoistman; Scraper
vehicle and to ensure that the safety
Loader Operator operates electric or
systems in the vehicle are functional.
compressed air scraper machine or collect
and deposit blasted rocks. Moves scraper
Qualification Pack Details:
into working place and sets it up securely
QP NOS Reference MIN/Q 0409
on timber foundation. Sets snatch blocks
QP NOS Name Sprinkler and Other
(pulleys over which scraper cables run to
Vehicle Driver
change direction) and anchors them firmly
NSQF Level 4
to some post or side wall. Makes power
connections and starts hoists.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Manipulates levers according to signal to
operate cables to hoist or lower scraper Code 8111
hoc and drag scraper along track to collect Title Miners and Quarriers
loose one or rock and dump them at
VOLUME II B 319
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8111.2700 SURFACE TRAMMER if working on surface
Shovel Operator, Mines and UNDERGROUND TRAMMER if
engaged in underground work.
Shovel Operator, Mines, Shovel Driver;
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Rock Shovel Driver; Mechanical Shovel
Operator operates pneumatic or electric Code 8111
shovel to load mine cars or tubs with Title Miners and Quarriers
wastes or mineral rocks blasted inside
mine. Checks performance and safety 8111.2901
points of shovelling equipment. Moves it Wire Saw Operator
to working place and advances it into pile
of coal, ore or rock to be loaded for Wire Saw Operator operates a Wire saw
removal. Switches on and starts machine. machine which is used to cut large blocks
Manipulates sets of hand levers and foot of stone out from the marble quarry. Wire
pedals to force shovel into pile, lift it and saws are large machines that use
dump contents into cars or tubs placed diamond-impregnated beads on a cable to
along side. Advances machine into pile as cut through marble, granite and other
digging progresses and repeats operation similar rocks. Wire saw is also used for
to load material into car or tub. Moves squaring of the cut slab into square
machine from place to place in mine shaped blocks before transporting to the
according to requirement of work. production plant. Operating a Wire saw is
Lubricates, adjusts, and makes minor a specialized task that can be safely
running repairs to machines as required. performed only with adequate training
May mix rocks of different sizes or wet or and experience. Wire Saw Operators are
dry ores to prevent jamming of crusher also responsible to ensure basic upkeep of
machine. the machine and safety in operations.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8111 Code 8111
Title Miners and Quarriers Title Miners and Quarriers
8111.2800 8111.9900
Trammer, Mines Mines, Quarrymen and Related
Workers, Other
Trammer (Mines) Tram Pusher, Trolley
Man pushes loaded and empty mine cars
Mines and Quarrymen and Related
on track to specified places in mine or
Workers, Other include all other workers
quarry with or without haulage engines.
engaged in mining, quarrying, well drilling
Sets track points and controls movement
and related activities, not elsewhere
of cars or tubes using sprags (timber props
classified.
or short pieces of wood, used to prevent
wheels of train from revolving while
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
pushing onward. Adjusts stop block and
Code 8111
runway switches in track for taking safety
Title Miners and Quarriers
measures May load ore or rock into cars
at working faces. Is designated as
VOLUME II B 320
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Family 8112 harrow disks. Moves lever to adjust blade
Mineral and Stone Processing Plant on feed tables to deliver coal to mixer.
Observes operation of machines to detect
Operators
malfunctioning, clogging, and unevenness
of flow. Frees clogged coal by striking side
Mineral and Stone Processing Plant
of hopper with mallet. Adjusts or replaces
Operators operate and monitor
screens and hammers in mill, using hand
machinery and equipment for processing
tools. Observes meters, gauges, and
rocks, minerals and stone to recover
thermometer, and records temperature,
refined products for immediate use or
oil consumption, tonnage mixed, and
further processing.
operating time. Cleans work areas, using
broom. May open valves and start pumps
8112.0100 to unload oil trucks. May test pulverised
Crusher Operator, Mineral coal for conformance to specifications.
May crush specific composition of coal
Crusher Operator, Mineral; Crusher (without blending).
Attendant, Mineral operates power driven
crushing machine to break coal ore or rock ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
into smaller sizes for further processing. Code 8112
Starts crusher by manipulating levers. Title Mineral and Stone Processing
Adjusts gap between rollers or male and Plant Operators
female cones of crushing jaws for desired
size of lumps. Regulates flow of minerals 8112.0300
from conveyor or chute and adjusts Stamp Mill Operator
crusher as necessary. Prods larger lumps
with bar to force them into crusher and
Stamp Mill Operator; operates stamp mill
breaks oversized lumps with sledge
to crush gold ore to obtain gold
hammer. Maintains uniform flow of
concentrate. Sets tappets and adjusts
crushed mineral to screens or rolls for
stroke of stamp with spanners to obtain
further sizing. May clean, lubricate and
optimum crushing of ore in mortar box.
make minor repairs to crusher.
Starts and maintains correct feeding of
gold ore and water into mortar box for
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
proper crushing. Discharges crushed ore
Code 8112 pulp through screens of mortar box onto
Title Mineral and Stone Processing blankets. Directs flow of water over
Plant Operators blankets for washing powdered ore
coming from stamp mill. Changes gunny
8112.0200 blankets from blanket tables at prescribed
Pulveriser Operator intervals and removes collected gold
concentrate. Washes blankets in
concentrating tank and collects gold from
Pulveriser Operator operates machines
James concentrating table. Lubricates mill
and equipment to crush and blend coal of
and performs minor repairs. Is designated
various compositions to obtain specified
as STAMPMILL MAN-IN CHARGE, if
mixture used in producing coke: Turns
engaged in issuing stores, supervising
valve to admit oil to mixer. Starts hammer
other workers maintaining supply and pay
mill, mixer, and conveyor equipped with
VOLUME II B 321
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
roll records etc. May operate stamp mill lead acetate to extractors in required
for extraction of silver. quantities to facilitate precipitation.
Cleans out extractor boxes to recover
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: precipitated gold. Chemically treats,
Code 8112 washes and dries precipitated gold by
Title Mineral and Stone Processing operating vacuum pumps, etc. Treats
Plant Operators residue slime with sulphuric acid to
recover remaining gold.
8112.0400
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Cyanide Man
Code 8112
Title Mineral and Stone Processing
Cyanide Man separates gold flakes out of
Plant Operators
crushed gold ore by treating ore in bath of
cyanide acid. Pumps finely ground gold
8112.0600
ore slime from collecting tanks to
agitators. Adds specified amount of lime Washing Plant Operator
and cyanide acid. Opens valve on
compressed air line to agitate slime. Uses Washing Plant Operator, Coal operates
simple hydrometer to check specific different machines and equipment for
gravity of solution. Maintains agitation of sizing, cleaning, washing and preparing
slime until required specific gravity is coal for sale or further processing. Checks
attained. Filters off cyanide solution operating condition of plant, machines
allowing formation of cake residue. and equipment, such as conveyor,
Repairs pumps, tanks and related crusher, agitator, elevator, wash box,
machinery. May issue stores, maintain pay blower, pump, feeder screen, core and
rolls, discipline and security of section. refuse gate. Sets and adjusts them as
May supervise work of other necessary to have desired pulsation,
subordinates. May work as Precipitator. correct performance, proper control of
air, water and coal, etc. by observing
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: readings on different meters and gauges
Code 8112 and by regulating values on control panel.
Title Mineral and Stone Processing Adjusts flow of raw coal through them to
Plant Operators separate slate rock and other impurities.
Operates cone to mix sand and water in
8112.0500 proper proportions to ensure correct
specific gravity and observes operation.
Precipitator
Tests sample of processed coal by
weighing and simple physical and
Precipitator exposes cyanide solution to
chemical tests to ensure correct
zinc shavings in order to precipitate and
percentage of ash content, and minimum
recover gold still remaining in solution.
rejection of usable coal. May conduct
Packs zinc box (extractor box) with zinc
repairs of machinery. May perform only a
shaving. Pumps gold solution from
portion of above duties and be designated
filtration plant into clarifier tanks.
as RAW COAL SECTION OPERATOR, FEED
Regulates flow of clarified gold solution
OPERATOR, CONE OPERATOR, REFUSE,
from clarifier tanks into extractor boxes to
precipitate gold by action of zinc. Adds
VOLUME II B 322
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
GATE OPERATOR, etc. according to Stone Cutter, Machine cuts stone to
operation performed or machine handled. required size on stone cutting machine.
Places stone slab on machine carriage and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: adjusts its position according to
Code 8112 measurements. Tightens slab on carriage
Title Mineral and Stone Processing by operating pressure handle and
Plant Operators switches on machine to revolve
carborundum or diamond cutting wheel.
8112.0700 Opens water valve to supply water on
stone slab to serve as coolant and raises
Stone Sawyer, Machine
machine carriage by operating lever or
hand wheel to bring cutting wheel in
Stone Sawyer Machine; Stone Sawing
contact with slab to be cut. Applies cut
Machine Man saws blocks of stones into
carefully and continues cutting till stone
slabs of required size by sawing machine.
slab is cut to required dimension. May
Places or directs placing of blocks of stone
work on stone polishing and stone sawing
on empty carriage or trolley with aid of
machine.
helpers, hoist or cranes. Levels and fixes
stone in cutting position with wedges,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
belts, metal plates, clamps and nuts etc.
Code 8112
as required. Fixes required number of saw
Title Mineral and Stone Processing
blades in sawing machine as needed,
Plant Operators
adjusts their distance according to size of
slabs to be cut and tightens them with
8112.0900
keys. Clutches machine or operates hand
screw to lower down saw blades till they Stone Polisher, Machine
touch upper surface of block to be cut and
pour or directs pouring of rough dry or Stone Polisher Machine operates stone
wet sand on it. Starts machines and tends polishing machine to polish surface of
it to ensure proper sawing of block. blocks or slabs of stone to required finish.
Adjusts sawing by declutching or Sets rough stone-block or slab on mud or
reclutching when it becomes heavy or suitable structure below grinding wheel of
light. Stops machine when stone is sawed, machine and places stone slab to be
shuts off valve to stop flow of water and polished on it. Sprinkles water and
directs removal of slabs cut from saw spreads rough and or other abrasive all
carriage or trolley. Changes and adjusts over its surface. Starts machine, sets
saw blades as necessary. machine wheel to revolve and slowly
brings it down in contact with stone to be
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: polished. Attends to machine and
Code 8112 sprinkles water and abrasive as and when
Title Mineral and Stone Processing required till stone is polished to required
Plant Operators finish. Switches off and stops machine
wheel. Removes stone slab and washes
8112.0800 rubbed surface with water. May polish
stone slabs by fixing iron or carborundum
Stone Cutter, Machine
blocks in grinding wheel of machine. May
polish stones to high finish using
VOLUME II B 323
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
chemicals and felt wheels. May work on screws on stone ware pipes. Fits
stone saw and stone cutting machine. appropriate thread cutting die in
machines. Lifts and sets pipe in wet
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: condition to spindle or roller of machine
Code 8112 with aid of helper, hoist or crane. Starts
Title Mineral and Stone Processing machine and cuts grooves or threads at
Plant Operators one end or both ends of pipe as required
by pressing thread cutting die on it. Cuts
8112.1000 pipe to required length by operating pipe
cutting attachment fitted to machine.
Pipe Machine Man, Stoneware
Ensures correct finis h of threads cut and
removes pipe from machine. Oils and
Pipe Machine Man, Stone Ware; Pipe Mill
lubricates machine. May cut threads on
Operator, Stone Ware operates pipe
pipe manually using metal template. May
making machine to make stone ware
operate pipe machine to make pipes.
pipes of required dimensions. Checks and
sets appropriate die in machine according
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to size of pipe to be made. Directs helpers
Code 8112
to feed plastic clay into machine hopper
Title Mineral and Stone Processing
and starts machine. Sets machine feed
Plant Operators
and speed to force clay into bell
mechanism and die set in machine and
8112.1200
watches automatic formation of required
length of pipe at regulated speed. Unlocks Cone Operator (Mine and Quarry)
machine table by operating lever and
stops machine to release and cut extruded Cone Operator (Mine and Quarry) tends
pipe by pushing cutting wire of machine cone (gravity device) to separate slate and
through it. Tilts socket to facilitate rock from coal: Presses buttons to start
removal of finished pipe for further conveyor and regulate flow of material
processing. Oils socket and outlet die to into top of cone. Turns valve to regulate
prevent sticking of clay to them. May test flow of water into bottom of cone and
texture of clay visually and suggest maintain specified pressure to carry coal
changes for moistening. May do minor off with overflow while rock and slate fall
running repairs to machine. to bottom. Pulls lever to open slate gate
at bottom and draw off impurities.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8112 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Mineral and Stone Processing Code 8112
Plant Operators Title Mineral and Stone Processing
Plant Operators
8112.1100
Thread Cutting Machine Operator, 8112.9900
Stoneware Mineral and Stone Processing Plant
Operators, Other
Thread Cutting Machine Operator,
Stoneware operates thread cutting Mineral Ore and Stone Processing Plant
machine to cut external or internal thread Operators, Other include all those who
VOLUME II B 324
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
operate and monitor machinery and properly and is of proper consistency.
equipment for processing mineral ore and Controls flow from well by capping it or by
stone not elsewhere classified. regulating valves. Supervises work of
assistants and maintains prescribed
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: records. May set up plant.
Code 8112
Title Mineral and Stone Processing ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Plant Operators Code 8113
Title Well Drillers and Borers and
Related Workers
Family 8113
8113.0200
Well Drillers and Borers and Derrickman
Related Workers
Derrickman; Rigman Petroleum and Gas
Well drillers and borers and related erects drilling rigs, fits the cables through
workers position, assemble and operate pulleys and blocks and assists Well driller
drilling machinery and related equipment in lifting and laying down tubing and
to sink wells, extract ore, liquids and gases removing drilling pipes. Sets crown blocks
or for a variety of other purposes. (pulley support connecting derrick posts
at top)in position with hoisting beams.
Strings up cables through to lift or lower
8113.0100
drill pipes. Cleans splashed oil from
Well Drillers, Petroleum and Gas
derrick floor. Assists drilling crew in
installing oil gas separator and gas line
Well Driller, Petroleum and Gas operates
and in dismantling equipment on
rotary type of drilling plant for sinking
completion of work or as required. Cleans
petroleum and gas wells. Manipulates
oil and maintains pulleys block etc. May
levers and throttles to control speed of
operate tongs, slips and spinning rope at
tools set in rotary table and to regulate
drilling stage. May be designated as Top
pressure of tools at bottom of borehole as
man if works on monkey board on rig at
indicated by gauge. Connects and
height of about 100 ft. from ground level.
disconnects sections of drill pipe as they
run into or out of well. Selects drill bits
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
according to nature of strata encountered
Code 8113
and changes them when blunt or when
Title Well Drillers and Borers and
strata change. Uses special tools to
Related Workers
retrieve broken or lost equipment from
borehole. Inspects cores or cuttings while
8113.0300
drilling to determine nature of strata
being encountered. Manipulates levers, Mudman
pedals and brakes to control machinery
which supplies power for lowering or Mudman prepares drilling mud fluid to
raising drill pipe and casing. Checks plastic mixture of compounded clay,
operation of slush pumps to ensure that chemicals and water of required
fluid which cools bit, removes cuttings and consistency by mixing clay and chemicals
seals wall of hole with clay is circulating in required proportions and controls mud
VOLUME II B 325
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
circulation pumps for flushing out drill Title Well Drillers and Borers and
cutting and cooling drill bites. Mixes clay, Related Workers
chemicals and water in required
proportions as instructed by MUD 8113.0500
SUPERVISOR to soften earth formation Well Puller
during drilling operations. Checks weight
and viscosity of mud at short intervals and
Well Puller removes, repairs and replaces
controls mud circulation pump s for
rods, casings and tubings of producing
flushing out drill cuttings and cooling drill
wells, cleans and services them with
bits. Maintains record of mud transactions
special tools and controls flow of oil or gas
and stock of chemicals used. Collects flush
according to pressure charts. Carries
and operates vibrating screen to remove
required tools, travelling block and block
silts and well cuttings. May clean channels
line, etc. to work site. Attaches cable to
and tanks. May work on wells other than
top of pump rod or casing and operates
petroleum and gas.
winch mounted on tractor to pull them
out for cleaning, repairs or replacements
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
as required. Disconnects each section of
Code 8113 pump rod and casing for cleaning,
Title Well Drillers and Borers and straightening and repairing according to
Related Workers nature of defects noticed. Runs packer
(plug device) into well to control flow of
8113.0400 oil, water or gas during well pulling
Cementer operations. Lowers swabber into well to
clear mud from screens at bottom of well
Cementer conducts mixing of cement in and to establish flow of oil. Records well
proper consistency and cementing pressure by lowering pressure-recording
annular spaces between casings and devices into it and interprets pressure
sidewalls of well. Rigs up high pressure charts. Keeps well Puller Supervisor
lines, makes arrangements for cementing informed of defects and repairs done in
and connects hopper section tank and pump and casing. May measure and
other pipelines. Obtains information record tubing length. May recover tubing
regarding condition of strata to be and rods from abandoned well and plug it
cemented from Well Driller to determine with cement.
quality and quantity of cement to be used.
Mixes cement, limestone, clay, water and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
other chemicals to form slurry. Pumps Code 8113
slurry under pressure to seal space Title Well Drillers and Borers and
between steel casing and side wall and Related Workers
decides time required for setting of
cement. Keeps record of cement used. 8113.0600
Studies graphical reports and informs well Scaperman
conditions to proper authorities.
Scraperman scrapes off and pulls out wax
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
from inside tubing by operating power
Code 8113 driven scraper. Fixes scraping tools to
scraper with assistance of Rigman and
VOLUME II B 326
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
places tractor or winch by side of well. power driven drilling machine. Collects
Operates scraper by tractor or winch to sample of soil from selected site of boring
scrap off wax from inside tubing. Pulls out for analysis. Selects suitable drilling bit
scrapped wax from inside of drill pipes to (diamond for hard stone and steel for soft
keep well open for production. May rock and hard earth) according to strata of
attend to normal maintenance of earth to be bored. Hoists tabular casing
equipment. over selected site. Starts machine and
drills earth strata to drive casing into it.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Sinks additional casing when required into
Code 8113 well. Sends soil and rock samples for
Title Well Drillers and Borers and analysis while boring. Removes
Related Workers unnecessary pipes from bored well. May
insert water jet alongside of drill head to
8113.0700 soften earth and make drilling easier.
Removes sludge or debris from bore hole
Gauger
by operating pump or other equipment.
Gauger controls flow lines in oil head
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
tanks, dries off accumulated moisture by
Code 8113
operating steam heating valves and
Title Well Drillers and Borers and
delivers oil to oil pumps. Takes dip
Related Workers
readings of various tanks before and after
bleeding of water and records them.
8113.9900
Operates steam heating valves of tanks to
dry off accumulated moisture and Well Drillers and Borers and
intimates dip readings to Gas Supervisor Related Workers, Other
either on phone or through messengers.
Opens delivery valve of well head tank to Well Drillers and Borers and Related
deliver oil to pump house, maintains Workers, Other include workers who erect
record of oil dispatched from each well on and operate drilling machinery and
dispatch tickets and sends them to equipment and perform related tasks in
Production Clerk. Ensures that tank does the sinking and operation of well not
not overflow. Reports tank and pipe elsewhere classified.
condition to proper authorities.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8113
Code 8113 Title Well Drillers and Borers and
Title Well Drillers and Borers and Related Workers
Related Workers
8113.0800 Family 8114
Well Driller, Machine (Other than
Petroleum and Gas) Cement, Stone and Other Mineral
Products Machine Operators
Well Driller, Machine (Other than
Petroleum and Gas) sinks, bores and Cement, Stone and Other Mineral
develops well at selected site by operating Products Machine Operators operate and
VOLUME II B 327
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
monitor machines for manufacturing and Batching and Mixing Plant Operator,
finishing precast concrete, bitumen, and Construction; Batchingman, Construction;
stone products, and making cast stone for Concrete Mixer Plant Operator operates
building purposes. power-driven central mixer plant that
prepares batch and mixes concrete. Starts
8114.0100 power unit and rotation of mixing drum;
opens hopper doors of gravel, sand and
Polishing Machine Operator
cement storage bins to allow these
(Mosaic)
materials to flow into scale hoppers for
automatic weighing; opens scale hopper
Polishing Machine Operator (Mosaic Tiles)
doors to allow weighed materials to pass
operates polishing machine fitted with
into mixing drum in required proportion;
revolving grinding discs to polish mosaic
opens valve allowing correct amount of
tiles to high finish. Fits appropriate
water to flow from measuring tank into
grinding (carborundum) bricks to rotating
mixing drum; allows drum to rotate for
discs of machine. Spreads layer of cement
specified time for proper mixing of
solution of required shade over floor
materials into concrete; opens discharge
surface and sprinkles floor area with
chute to empty concrete from mixing
water. Connects machine to power supply
drum into bucket, conveyor or other
and switches on machine to rotate
carrier; controls batch timer and records
revolving discs. Runs machine slowly over
number of batches; cleans mixer. May
entire surface of tile floor to grind and
repair and maintain mixer and power unit.
polish it. Changes grinding stones of
May supervise helpers.
machine as required. Repeats sprinkling of
cement liquid over surface for settling
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
between tile joints and polishes floor
Code 8114
surface again using finer type of grinding
Title Cement, Stone and Other Mineral
stone. Washes polished surface with
Products Machine Operators
water and ensures required finish.
Removes grinding stones and fits felt or
8114.0300
cloth pad to machine. Sprinkles oxalic acid
Concrete Mixer Operator
powder with water over polished surface
and continues polishing to secure glossy
finish on polished surface. Cleans and Concrete Mixer Operator operates small
polishes corners, edges of room with portable power-driven concrete mixing
grinding stones. Oils and cleans machine machine to mix dry cement, sand, gravel
periodically. May attend to minor repairs and water for making concrete or cement
to machine. mortar. Starts motor and rotation of
mixing drum; feeds materials (sand, gravel
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and cement) in proper proportion into
mixing drum, using shovel or by
Code 8114
manipulating lever that controls feeding;
Title Cement, Stone and Other Mineral
admits measured amount of water into
Products Machine Operators
drum; allows drum to rotate for specified
time for proper mixing of materials into
8114.0200
concrete; discharges concrete from drum
Batching and Mixing Plant
by tilting drum or by opening discharge
Operator (Construction)
VOLUME II B 328
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
chute; cleans interior with water and upper plate with opening over hole to
removes adhering concrete. May emery wheel; pours molten lead from
undertake running repairs. furnace through hole of upper plate into
emery wheel hole to form bush round it;
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: allows lead to cool down and then
Code 8114 releases foot pedal to drop central
Title Cement, Stone and Other Mineral spindle; removes cooled upper plate from
Products Machine Operators emery wheel; loosens chuck nuts and
bolts and removes bushed abrasive wheel.
8114.0500 Maintains power heated lead furnace or
kettle at prescribed temperature to keep
Cast Stone Maker
lead in molten condition.
Cast-Stone Maker; Artificial-Stone Maker
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
performs one or more hand or machine
Code 8114
tasks in making of artificial stone which
Title Cement, Stone and Other Mineral
simulates natural stone. Mixes materials,
Products Machine Operators
such as water, cement, gravel, granite
chippings, slag, coke, breeze or stone dust
8114.0700
in required proportions by hand or
machine. Fills moulds with mixture, allows Fettler (Brick and Tile)
mixture to harden and removes it from
mould. Finishes cast stone by smoothing Fettler (Brick and Tile) grinds and sands
surface with sand-stone, polishing with ceramic products, such as clay slabs,
emery and buffing wheel and levelling refractory tiles, ceramic tiles, and bisque
corners and edges. May be designated tiles to remove defects, press marks, or
according to work performed. rough spots: Grinds, brushes, or scrapes
surface of ceramic product to remove
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: rough spots, press marks, and defects,
Code 8114 using power grinder and wire or stiff
Title Cement, Stone and Other Mineral brush. Smoothens (fettles) edges and
Products Machine Operators surface of product, using sandpaper or
handstone. Discards broken or poorly
8114.0600 pressed tile. Stacks ceramic tile or clay
slates in specified pattern on boards,
Lead Brush Maker (Abrasive
plates, trays, or in saggers. May measure
Wheel)
dimensions of tile for conformance to
specifications, using gauge. May tend
Lead Bush Maker (Abrasive Wheel) makes
machine that automatically fettles tile.
lead bushes for abrasive wheel by running
molten lead around metal core inserted
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
into centre hole. Places abrasive wheel
Code 8114
over chuck-like platform of machine;
Title Cement, Stone and Other Mineral
presses foot pedal of machine to lift
Products Machine Operators
spindle disc device to fit into hole of
emery wheel; positions emery wheel
8114.9900
correctly and fastens it to chuck by
tightening bolts and nuts. Sets metal
VOLUME II B 329
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Cement and Other Mineral 8121.0300
Products Machine Operators, Other Larry Car Driver, Furnace
Cement and Other Mineral Products Larry Car Driver, Furnace; Scale Car Driver,
Machine Operators, Other include Furnace operates and loads larry car
workers who operate and monitor (electric car run on track) with raw
extrusion, moulding, mixing, grinding and material (limestone, iron-ore, etc.) as per
cutting machines which manufacture and instructions of Stock House Foreman or
finish various pre-cast concrete and stone Control Man Blast Furnace from
products, or which make cast stone for respective bunkers and unloads the Minto
building purposes not elsewhere skip for charging into blast furnace.
classified. Receives instructions from Stock House
Foreman regarding sequence, proportion
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and rate of charging of different raw
Code 8114 material into blast furnace. Drives car to
Title Cement, Stone and Other Mineral respective bunkers and mechanically
Products Machine Operators loads container (fitted to car) with proper
quantities of raw material keeping watch
on weighing scale mounted on car. Drives
Group 812
car to unloading platform and unloads
Metal Processing and Finishing
contents into skip either by tilting or drop
Plant Operators
bottom system. Keeps Stock House
Foreman and Control Man informed of
Metal Processing and Finishing Plant charging rate. May also maintain bunker
Operators, operate and monitor single and charging rate account.
function process control machinery and
equipment to control the conversion, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
processing and finishing of mineral ores Code 8121
and metals. Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
Occupations in this Group are classified 8121.2300
into the following Families:
Shearing and Upcoiler Operator
(Non-Ferrous Metal)/Coil Operator
8121 Metal Processing Plant Operators
8122 Metal Finishing, Plating and
Shearing and Upcoiler Operator (Non-
Coating Machine Operators
Ferrous Metal) sizes and coils plates and
sheets to required specifications by up-
Family 8121 coiling machine. Sets shearing distance
and rolls of up coiling machine. Presses
Metal Processing Plant Operators
paddle to shear one end of plate or sheet.
Starts rolls of coiling machine and feed,
Metal Processing Plant Operators,
plate or sheet into collar of rolls by metal
operate, monitor, adjust and maintain,
rods, tongs etc. Shears tail end of plate or
single process machinery and equipment
sheet and operates lever to eject coil out.
to process and convert mineral ores and
May set shearing blade and do running
refine, harden, roll and extrude metals.
repairs of up-coiling machine. May also
VOLUME II B 330
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
maintain machine log and lot (material) ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
tickets. Code 8121
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8121 8121.2700
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators Roller, Second Hand, Strip Mill
(Non-Ferrous Metal)
8121.2400
Flattening Machine and Flying
Roller, Second Hand, Strip Mill (Non-
Shear Operator (Non-Ferrous Ferrous Metal) feeds coil strips in to roller
Metal) by hand, pneumatic or other device, and
finally coils finished strips in drum coiler
Flattening Machine and Flying Shear (drum type machine). Feeds coil-strip
Operator (Non-ferrous Metal) flattens and through guides in to do coiler (Mechanical
shears coiled strips to required device on rolled system for decoiling),
dimensions by flattening machine and lowers bridle (Mechanical attachment) by
flying shear. Sets shearing distance, lever for applying tension on coil strip (by
adjusts roll gaps (mechanically), feeds coil means of compressed air operated rollers)
strips into roller, checks thickness of and feeds strip for roughing. Guides strip
flattened strip by micrometre or gauge in between roller during re-rolling
before flying shear finally cuts strip to operations and on return of re-rolled strip
required size, maintains record of strips operates drum coiler for final coiling.
cut. May undertake minor repairs.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 8121
Code 8121 Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
8121.3000
8121.2500 Charger, Reverberatory, Pulverised
Slitting Machine Operator (Non- Coal Fired/Reverberatory Furnace
Ferrous Metal) Operator
Slitting Machine Operator (Non-ferrous Charger, Reverberatory Furnace,
Metal) operates slitting machines to cut Pulverized Coal Fired cleans and sets
edges lengthwise by disk cutters to get furnace for charging and charges raw
correct width. Measures with steel tape or material (Scrap iron, pig iron and steel
scale and sets distance of cutters fitted on scrap) in to furnace for melting. Removes
two electrically operated shafts to sticking slag, junk, etc. from furnace by
required width. Starts machine, feeds hand tools. Seals holes and doors of
coiled sheet through guides on to cutters furnace (tapping hole, slag door, etc. with
(collected at other end by Labourers). May clay). Repairs molten metal runner for
operate drum-coiling machine by switch tapping. Keeps material ready for charging
for coiling sized sheets. May also maintain on trolley in front of charging door. Opens
machine log and lot (material) tickets. charging door and pushes the raw
materials into furnace on receipt of
VOLUME II B 331
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
instructions from Furnace man, Slag Flusher
Reverberatory. Closes charging door, seals
it and hands over fully charged furnace to Slug Flusher; Furnace Assistant, Cupola
furnace man Reverberatory. May do removes slag, solidified metal and junk
minor repairs of furnace and chimney coke from furnace by poking through slag
under guidance of furnace man holes. Cautions other workers and opens
Reverberatory. slag hole by metal poker. Pokes and rakes
furnace by metal poking bars, adjusts
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: blast and blows off slag, and watches slag
Code 8121 condition. Plugs slag hole with clay after
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators blowing off. May extinguish cupola fire.
May also charge mechanized furnace.
8121.3100
Melter Reveraberatory-Furnace, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Pulverised Coal Code 8121
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
Fired/Reverberatory Furnace
Operator
8121.3301
Casting or Foundry
Melter Reverberatory Furnace, Pulverized
Assistant/Helper
Coal Fired; Fireman, Reverberatory
Furnace, Pulverized Coal Fired prepares
furnace, lights fire and controls blast and Casting Helper will be involved in cleaning
feeding of pulverized coal in to furnace for the slag, supporting in pre casting and
maintaining required temperature. Sets post casting operations and storing the
log in side furnace and ignite them with output at
flaming torch. Starts machine for feeding designated place.
furnace with pulverized coal. Starts
secondary blower after furnace acquires Qualification Pack Details:
necessary temperature. Adjusts draft of QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3201
chimney as per instructions of furnace QP NOS Name Casting or Foundry
man Reverberatory. Takes out slags Assistant/Helper
through slag door, stirs metal and opens NSQF Level 2
tap hole by metal bar for taping molten
metal. Places slag trap before slag starts ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
flowing into molten metal. Controls blast Code 8121
and feeding of pulverised coal under Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
instructions from Furnace man,
Reverberatory. May draw out samples at 8121.3701
intervals as required by Furnace man
Heat Treating Furnace Operator
Reverberatory.
Heat Treating Furnace Operator heats
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
metals in closed furnace for heat
Code 8121
treatment such as tempering, hardening,
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
normalizing, annealing, etc. Places metal
charges in furnace trays, box or arranges
8121.3300
VOLUME II B 332
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
them in line by crane or other suitable Die Casting Machine Operator
device. Pushes charges inside furnace by
hand, winch or other device. Closes Die Casting Machine Operator operates
furnace door. Switches on current for die-casting machine to make zinc,
generating heat inside furnace. Ignites aluminium and alloy castings for gears,
burner and sets blower for flow of fuel carburettor bodies, machinery parts,
and air in case of oil or gas fired furnace. equipment, etc. Charges furnace with
Sets and watches temperature controlling slabs of metal and adds specified quantity
instruments. Heats charges to requisite of alloy. Transfers molten alloy to heated
temperature. Opens furnace gate and reservoir of machine with crane or hand
extracts charges electrically, mechanically ladle. Removes metal fragments from die
or manually with tongs, hooked bars etc. surfaces and brushes cavities with
May do preheating in closed non- compound to prevent casting from
conducting cases by stoves, gas or electric adhering to die. Regulates valves to heat
furnace and be designated as PRE- furnace, circulate water through die and
HEATING FURNACE OPERATOR. to force hot metal in to die. Move levers
to open and close to halves of water-
Qualification Pack Details: cooled die. Hooks completed casting from
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3901 die with steel wire and cools it in water.
QP NOS Name Heat Treatment
Technician/Furnace ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Operator Code 8121
NSQF Level 4 Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 8121.4201
Code 8121 Pressure Die Casting Operator
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
(PDC)
8121.3801
PDC Casting Operator manages the
Assistant Casting Technician
specifications of the molten metal, setting
up and operating the casting machinery
Casting Technician manages the and forming and finishing the metal cast
specifications of the molten metal, setting
up and operating the casting machinery Qualification Pack Details:
and forming and finishing the metal cast
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3204
QP NOS Name Pressure Die Casting
Qualification Pack Details:
Operator (PDC)
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3202 NSQF Level 4
QP NOS Name Casting Technician
L3
NSQF Level 3 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8121
Code 8121 Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
8121.4300
8121.4200
VOLUME II B 333
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Casting Machine Operator (Non- Code 8121
Ferrous Metal) Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
8121.4500
Casting Machine Operator (Non-Ferrous
Metals) sets up and operates continuous Spun Pipe Machine Operator
casting machine to produce tubes and
rods. Threads graphite die into bottom of Spun Pipe Machine Operator operates
crucible, which holds molten metal during spinning machine to make spun metal
casting process. Places water jacket pipes. Moves pipe spinning machine
around die and connects water lines. under spout of ladle containing molten
Inserts metal bar (starting tip) through die metal and allows metal to flow into
into crucible where it provides weld with vertical pipe mould; moves machine back
molten metal. Inserts metal extension rod to normal position and starts mould
through driving roller and threads it to spinning rapidly to evenly distribute metal
starting tip. Regulates speed of rollers to and eliminate gas bubbles. Allows metal
draw extension rods, starting tip, and to set and removes pipe from mould,
molten metal through die in continuous using pipe putter. Gets mould filled with
casting process. required quantity of molten metal.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8121 Code 8121
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
8121.4400 8121.4600
Casting-Operator Helper Core Maker, Machine
(Nonferrous Metal)
Core Maker, Machine makes cores, using
Casting-Operator Helper (Nonferrous machine, for placing in mould to have
Metal) assists CASTING MACHINE designed holes in metal castings. Selects
OPERATOR (Nonferrous Metal) in casting die and spiral conveyor screw and fastens
aluminium alloys into ingots: Places them to machine. Mixes sand and binding
distributing trough between furnace tap material and packs mixture into feed box
hole and mould. Positions baffle plates, of machine. Starts motor or turns crank by
screens, and control pins in trough, using hand to rotate screw and to take mixture
hand tools. Takes sample of molten metal from box and press it through die to form
for subsequent analysis. Skims dross off core. Cuts off core as required, repairs
molten aluminium in holding furnace, damaged surfaces and passes it on for
using drag rake. Inserts thermocouple into baking or drying in oven or heated
mould and records temperature of ingot. chambers. May perform some tasks
Examines ingot for cracks, using involved in making cores by hand.
reflectoscope. Stencils identification
numbers on ingots. Hooks cable to ingot ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
for removal by OVERHEAD CRANE Code 8121
OPERATOR. Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 8121.4700
VOLUME II B 334
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Annealer, Metal quenches them in water or oil or cools
them by air blast according to type of
Annealer, Metal anneals (softens) metals steel. May harden material by salt both
by heating and cooling, for easy- (molten cyanide, lead, nitrates, etc.) or by
machining, rolling, bending, etc., and for single heating and quenching or cooling
relieving internal stresses caused by process.
working or by unequal contraction in
casting. Starts furnace and heats material ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
in it up to required temperature for Code 8121
specified time depending upon type and Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
size of material. Stops furnace and allows
material to cool down inside it. Anneals 8121.4900
copper by heating and immediately Temperer, Metal
quenching in water. May do pack
annealing by putting material in sealed
Temperer, Metal removes brittleness
box and by heating and cooling it in
caused by hardening of material (Tools,
furnace. May cool material in sand, lime
machine parts, etc.) by re-heating and
or ash if working on open furnace. May be
quenching or cooling process. Puts
designated as NORMALISER, if engaged in
hardened material inside furnace and
normalizing (removing stresses) fatigued
controls its temperature depending on
metal parts by process of repeated
type of steel. Allows material to be heated
heating and cooling in air.
for specific time according to purpose of
tool. Switches off furnace, withdraws
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
materials and quenches or cools them
Code 8121 according to type of steel.
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8121.4800
Code 8121
Hardener, Metal Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
Hardener Metal hardens metal articles 8121.5200
such as tools, machine parts etc. for Looper, Metal Drawing
tempering and other purposes. Puts them
in pre-heating furnace for heating.
Looper, Metal Drawing passes rod
Controls furnace temperature and heats
through series of rolls to reduce it in to
charges to prescribed temperature
wire of required specifications. Watches
depending upon type of steel. Allows
approach of rod, holds it with pair of
charges to remain in furnace for required
tongs and directs it through guide into
period according to size, composition and
roll. May remove scraps if necessary and
type of steel. Transfers charges to
also assist in setting height and different
hardening furnace and controls its
passes (steel dies of various sizes) of rolls.
temperate to prescribed degree according
May be designated as REPEATER,
to size, composition and type of steel.
ROUGHING LOOPER or HEAD ROUGHER,
Allows charges to remain there for specific
according to stage of work.
time. Switches off furnace, takes out
charges by tongs or other suitable device,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 335
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Code 8121 and its dropping in to billet container.
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators Orders positioning of upsetting device
above billet container, and lower ram of
8121.5500 press to upsetting device for spreading
Seamless Pipe and Tube Drawers billet until it fits snugly in to container.
Moves hand and foot levers to cause ram
to descent and press billet through dies
Seamless Pipe and Tube Drawer draws
and to regulate speed to extrusion for
ferrous and non-ferrous tubing of
prevention of tears in metal and
specified internal and external diameter
adherence of metal to container walls.
by machine. Places rough tube in position
Raises ram to top of stroke and lowers cut
on draw bench. Sets die (tapered plug) in
off device to shear of residue and free
centre of hole in die block. Pushes or pulls
extruded tube or selection from die.
end of rough tubes through die block and
Maintains record of pump pressure,
secures it with tongs to or carriage in
number of tubes and sizes formed, kind of
motion, pulling tube over plug to
metals extruded etc. as prescribed. May
travelling chain or moveable carriage. Sets
operate vertical or horizontal extruding
chain or carriage in motion, pulling tube
press. May do minor repairs to machine.
over plug, to determine internal and
external diameter. Stops chain or carriage
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
when length is drawn and removes tongs
from tube. Repeats operation until Code 8121
specified diameter is obtained. May be Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
designated according to type of tube
drawn or metal used. 8121.5800
Metal Drawing Operatives
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8121 Metal Drawing Operatives perform variety
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators of routine and low skilled tasks in making
or drawing of wire from billets such as
8121.5600 loading of billet into furnace, pushing hot
Extrusion Press Operator billets to discharge doors, opening furnace
discharge door and pushing billets to
pinching rolls, lifting and guiding rods into
Extrusion Press Operator; Extruder
loping channels, cutting samples, oiling,
Operator (Metal) sets up and operates
cleaning, etc. and may be designated as
hydraulic extrusion press to shape
Cold Billet Pusher, Hot Billet Pusher,
seamless tubings and rods of round, flat
Furnace Hooker, Finishing Hooker, Sample
or irregular cross sections from hot billets.
Cutter etc.
Receives necessary work schedule and
examines drawings and other
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
specifications. Selects dies, billet
Code 8121
container and mandrel, fixes them in
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
press and sets alignment, temperature
etc. as required. Checks and adjusts
pressure of hydraulic, water and other
8121.9900
pumps for necessary operation. Directs
removal of hot billet from heating furnace
VOLUME II B 336
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Metal Processing Plant Operators, sawdust or centrifugal air dryer. Transfers
Other components to unrigging rack or other
specified place for policing. May prepare
plating solution under guidance of shop
Metal Drawers and Extruders, Other
supervisor. Is designated as GILLDER if
include all other metal drawers and
engaged in gold platting and ANODISER if
extruders such as those engaged in
colours aluminium and light alloys article
assisting operation of hydraulic extrusion
using specific chemical solutions.
press, assisting in setting dies for wire
drawing, etc., not elsewhere classified.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 8122
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
Code 8121
Coating Machine Operators
Title Metal Processing Plant Operators
8122.0101
Family 8122
Surface Treatment Technician
Metal Finishing, Plating and
Surface Treatment Technician is
Coating Machine Operators
responsible for conducting electroplating,
powder coating and Anodizing operations
Metal Finishing, Plating and Coating
as per the product and the customer
Machine Operators operate and monitor
requirement to ensure that the surface of
equipment which finishes, plates and
the metallic body becomes resistant to
coats metal articles or parts, in order to
chemicals, moisture and other wear and
give them improved resistance to
tear.
corrosion and abrasion, for decorative
purposes, or to impart electrical or
Qualification Pack Details:
magnetic properties.
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3801
QP NOS Name Surface Treatment
8122.0100
Technician Level 4
Electroplater
NSQF Level 4
Electroplater gives coating of gold, silver, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
nickel, chromium, copper etc. of required
Code 8122
thickness to metal parts by electrolytic
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
process. Examines strength of metallic
Coating Machine Operators
solution and sets anode plates (positive
terminal) in solution. Suspends de-greased
8122.2000
components well dipped in side plating
Enameller, Chemical
solution and connects cathode (negative)
to it. Regulates current and allows
Enameller, Chemical applies thin film of
components to remain dipped in solution
enamel on metal components by dipping
for specific period depending upon type
in enamelling solution and drying them in
and thickness of plating required.
ovens. Checks quantity and quality of
Removes components and swills them in
enamel in glazed porcelain bath (vat). Dips
hot and cold water baths. Dries them in
components in bath and suspends them in
VOLUME II B 337
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
mechanical conveyor passing through acid), flux (zinc chloride) and zinc baths.
closed drying oven. Checks components Preheat articles if necessary and dips or
after drying and repeats process to ensure passes them either manually or
good finish. May dip and dry components mechanically through, acid, water, flux
manually. Is designated as LACQUERER or and zinc baths successively at controlled
JAPANER if engaged in manually applying speed. Skims dirt from baths and
solution of film forming substances or continues operation with necessary
Black Japan Varnish. May also apply adjustment of solution, temperature etc.,
enamel or other solution by brush or ensuring regular and uniform coating.
spray. May similarly apply tin coating using palm
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: oil as flux and be designated as TIN
Code 8122 PLATER or TINNING MACHINE OPERATOR.
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and May regulate temperature by gauges and
Coating Machine Operators by colour of melting metals.
8122.3000 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Reeling Machine Operator Code 8122
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
Coating Machine Operators
Reeling Machine Operator, Metal Drawing
tends to continuous supply of wire to lead
8122.5500
bath for coating and reeling of finished
wire. Mounts reels on shaft and draws Metal Sprayer
wires through lead, acid, and washing
baths to other side. Fixes ends to empty Metal Sprayer sprays metal on worn out
reels mounted on electrically driven shaft. metal part either for increasing size or for
Starts motor and watches smooth running coating them. Fixes part in lathe, fastens
of wires. Changes reels and joins ends of spray gun in tool post of lathe, pushes
wires as and when required. Stops motor wire feed through hole in spray gun,
and pulls out wire in case of breakage. connects rubber pipe with oxygen,
May be known as REEL OPERATOR, BACK acetylene and compressed air container
SIDE, and REEL OPERATOR, FRONT SIDE, through respective nozzles of gun and
according to position of work. regulates valves for their correct supply.
Ignites mixture with flint. Starts lathe to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: revolve part for uniform application of
Code 8122 metal, adjusts wire feed, moves gun to
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and and fro for even spray of metal on portion
Coating Machine Operators to be sprayed and checks part from time
to time for size and uniform coating. May
8122.3500 use different type of fixtures and may
Galvanizer/Operator- manually operate spray gun.
Electroplating, Galvanising
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8122
Galvanizer applies coating of zinc on
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
ferrous articles by dipping them in molten
Coating Machine Operators
zinc. Checks and controls quantity, quality
8122.6000
and temperature of acid (hydrochloric
VOLUME II B 338
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Sample Checker, Metal Making is designated as SAND BLASTER if uses
sand instead of steel grits.
Sample Checker, Metal Making; Sampler,
Metal Making checks samples of metal ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
under production in furnace, rolling mill, Code 8122
foundry section, etc. by sight, gauges or Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
instruments to ensure these are according Coating Machine Operators
to specifications. Checks blooms, billets, 8122.6700
forgings, metal castings etc. in production Picker
in furnace, rolling mill, forging, foundry or
other metal making sections by sight,
Picker removes foreign matter and cleans
gauges, measuring devices, crack
both ferrous and non-ferrous articles by
defectors and other necessary
dipping them in succession in acid and
instruments Ensures correct dimensions,
water baths. Loads articles in cradles or in
weight, soundness and absence of blow
some hooking arrangement and dips them
holes, irregular formation, etc. as per
in acid bath or tank. Agitates bath or tanks
specifications and tolerances. Approves or
by moving articles manually or
records defects observed and suggests
mechanically for few minutes depending
rectifications or rejections as necessary.
on type and condition of material.
May be designated as SAMPLER, BLAST
Transfers articles mechanically or
FURNACE; VIEWER, ROLLING MILL;
manually to water bath or tank and
VIEWER, FORGING, CHECKER, FOUNDRY;
washes acids off by stirring them in bath
etc. according to section and type of work
or tank. May use more than one acid bath
done.
or tank of varying concentration. May also
dip articles in alkaline tank for neutralizing
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
acid effect.
Code 8122
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Coating Machine Operators
Code 8122
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
8122.6200
Coating Machine Operators
Shot Blaster
8122.6900
Shot Blaster cleans metal surface by Hardness Tester, Metal
spraying steel grits on it at high pressure
by means of compressed air. Lays articles
Hardness Tester, Metal checks hardness
to be cleaned in side shot blasting
of metal by operating hardness testing
chamber, gets covered completely with
machine. Places metal to be tubed on
protective clothing fitted with respiratory
table of machine Attaches specified
arrangements. Regulates air pressure and
weights to give required pressure and
flow of steel grits, holds hose fitted with
fixes steel ball or diamond cone tester in
nozzle over articles, opens nozzle and
machine depending upon type of metal to
sprays steel grits over them at high
be tested and machine used. Operates
pressure for required period of time.
lever to automatic press steel ball or
Checks metal surface from time to time
diamond cone with prescribed force on
for finish and repeats process if required,
metal surface and make deep impression,
VOLUME II B 339
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
a dent on it. Reads hardness registered by 8122.7100
machine or form chart and records it. Sizing Machine Operator (Abrasive
Approves or rejects tested metal
Wheel)
according to standard prescribed. May
keep record of number and nature of
Sizing Machine Operator (Abrasive); Sizer
articles tested. May clean and oil machine.
(Abrasive) operates automatic sizing
machine to coat glue on abrasive coated
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
cloth or paper. Fills glue tank of machine
Code 8122
with glue; draws of abrasive coated paper
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
or cloth roll from drying chamber of
Coating Machine Operators
abrasive making machine and feeds it into
feed rolls of sizing machine; observes
8122.7000
operation of drawing and passing of
Speeder Machine Operator abrasive coated cloth or paper through
(Abrasive Wheel) rolls above glue container where thin
layer of glue coating is applied to abrasive
Speeder Machine Operator (Abrasive coated material for fixing it, and
Wheel) Abrasive Wheel Tester speed tests thereafter through drying chamber to
abrasive wheels on electric testing take down machine; stops machine, if
machine over normal operating speed to paper or cloth gets stuck up, releases
ensure that wheels are free from cracks. blocking and re-starts machine; reports to
Opens protective hood of machine and superiors if machine does not function
fits securely finished abrasive wheel on properly. May oil and clean machine.
hub of electric testing machine by
tightening nuts and bolts using flanges, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
washers and bushes where necessary, Code 8122
closes hood door; adjusts meter and Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
arbour of wheel to set machine for Coating Machine Operators
specified number of revolutions; starts
and runs machine at specified test speed 8122.7200
for specified test period; observes meter Abrasive Coated Cloth and Paper
reading to check and ensure that wheel
Maker
disc is revolving at set speed without
cracking; stops machine after set period of
Abrasive-Coated Cloth and Paper Maker;
running or earlier if disc cracks (indicated
Coating Flint Operator (Abrasive) roll in
by cracking noise). Opens hood door and
machine; draws end of paper or cloth roll
removes discs from spindle after bringing
through guide rollers of machine for
it to rest. Places tested discs at specified
feeding it with material; checks and
point. May stencil on wheel working
ensures that glue container and abrasive
speed in r.p.m.
grain hopper of machine are full with glue
and abrasive material, starts machine and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ensures drawing of paper/cloth through
Code 8122
rollers and application of glue on its
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
desired face proceeds correctly; observes
Coating Machine Operators
passing of glued paper/cloth through
series of rollers over electric grain
VOLUME II B 340
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
chamber where grain is sprayed to glue Belt Press Operator; Pressing Machine
portion of paper/cloth by electro- Operator (Abrasive) presses glued ends of
magnetic device; opens glue tap as abrasive coated cloth or paper belt by
necessary to maintain steady supply of pneumatic pressing machine to form
glue in glue container; stops machine if endless belt. Collects abrasive coated
abrasive coated paper/cloth gets stuck up, material; applies glue over skived ends of
cleans it and restarts; resets roll gaps as belt with hand brush; joins one end of belt
necessary for even tension of paper/cloth over another carefully to form continuous
drawn; ensures that abrasive coated roll and endless belt without ridges at joint;
passes into drying chamber for onward sets pneumatic pressing machine and
transmission to sizing machine. Supervises places joined end of belt over platen of
work of helpers; replaces empty spool or machine; operates foot pedal of machine
beam of paper or cloth roll with filled to lower upper ram of machine and press
ones to maintain continuous supply. joint of abrasive belt at set pressure;
Reports irregular functioning of machine removes material when press opens up
to superiors for removal of defects. automatically after set period. May trim
edges with hand scissors.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8122 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and Code 8122
Coating Machine Operators Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
Coating Machine Operators
8122.7300
Skiving Machine Operator 8122.7500
(Abrasive) Roll Winding Machine Operator
(Abrasive)
Skiving Machine Operator; Skiver
(Abrasive) operates skiving machine to Roll Winding Machine Operator; Take
remove abrasive grain from abrasive Down Machine Operator (Abrasive)
coated cloth and bevel edges for joining operates roll winding machine to wind
ends to form endless band. Starts abrasive paper or cloth coming in
machine and feeds ends of abrasive band continuous lengths, into rolls of
by hand through revolving grinding wheel prescribed size. Fixes empty spool to
to remove coated abrasive grains to machine and clamps it securely; draws by
reduce thickness of material; checks hand, roll of paper or cloth coming from
skiving done at ends and ensures that drying chamber and rolls it over empty
they are uniform; repeats skiving if spool giving few turns for holding it firmly;
necessary. May oil and clean machine. starts machine and observes winding of
abrasive cloth or paper on spool; stops
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: machine after roll attains prescribed size;
Code 8122 removes rolled material from machine
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and using hoist equipment and continuous
Coating Machine Operators operation with new spool. May oil and
clean machine.
8122.7400
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Belt Press Operator (Abrasive)
VOLUME II B 341
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Code 8122 adjusts machine for speed, tension of
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and paper or cloth and slitting of roll to
Coating Machine Operators required width and length; starts machine
and observes slitting of roll to required
8122.7600 widths and winding of slit material into
Sheet Cutter (Abrasive) rolls over collapsible spindle set on
opposite side of machine; stops machine
on completion of operation and removes
Sheet Cutter (Abrasive); Abrasive Sheeting
smaller wound rolls an collapsible spindle
Machine Operator cuts roll of abrasive
or spool from slit roll; repeats process;
paper or cloth into sheets of prescribed
keeps record of output given. May clean
sizes using sheet cutting machine fitted
and oil machine.
with rotating knives. Loads roll of abrasive
paper or cloth on machine frame either
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
manually or by hoisting equipment; draws
free end of abrasive paper or cloth roll Code 8122
and passes it over feed rolls of machine; Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
adjusts guides on scale to obtain specified Coating Machine Operators
length of sheet, screws guides to hold
sheets in position sets knives or cutting 8122.7800
blades to machine and adjusts them to cut Clicker Press Operator (Abrasive)
material; starts machine and observes
cutting operation and removal of cut Clicker Press Operator (Abrasive) operates
pieces over conveyor system; stops power press to cut pieces of abrasive
machine if paper gets stuck up, releases material to desired specifications. Sets die
block and re-starts machine. Replaces in machine in which material is to be cut;
blunt knives with sharp ones when starts machine, feeds abrasive coated
required. May clean and oil machine. paper or cloth into machine and ensures
that operation proceeds correctly and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: makes necessary adjustment to machine
Code 8122 collects cut pieces from machine and
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and bundles them. May oil and clean machine.
Coating Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8122.7700 Code 8122
Slitting Machine Operator Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
(Abrasive) Coating Machine Operators
8122.7900
Slitting Machine Operator (Abrasive)
operates slitting machine to cut roll of Splint Feeder (Match)
abrasive paper or cloth into smaller sizes
or rolls of lesser width and length. Loads Splint Feeder (Match) feeds match splints
roll of abrasive paper or cloth on machine in automatic machine to insert them in
frame either manually or by means of grooves or holding device for dipping
hoisting equipment; draws free end of splint tips with match-head composition
paper or cloth roll by hand and passes it and dry them in drying chamber. Brings
over feed rolls of machine; sets and trolley containing levelled splints from
VOLUME II B 342
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
levelling section; takes wooden tray dried splints into hopper of adjacent
containing levelled splints from trolley and polishing chamber for getting dried splints
feeds levelled sticks in magazine of polished in its revolving drum; pokes
machine by transferring contents of hopper of polishing chamber with wooden
wooden tray into it, keeping them stick to remove chocking and to push
arranged in same manner and position; dried splints inside revolving polishing
dresses levelled splints in magazine by drum. May carry splints from godown to
tapping with wooden pad and removing bins.
broken, uneven or cross splints; watches
feed or flow of levelled splints into ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine where stick feeding device Code 8122
automatically inserts each splint into Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
groove or holding device of continuous Coating Machine Operators
rotating conveyor chain; keeps magazine
continuously full by supplying levelled 8122.8100
splints from wooden trays; collects fallen
Levelling Machine Attendant
out splints from floor or pit and deposits
(Match)
them in basket to be taken to levelling
section; pushes empty trolley and leaves it
Levelling Machine Attendant (Match);
at levelling section; maintains place clean
Leveller (Match) operates levelling
and tidy. May operate machine and
machine to fill wooden trays with
collect fully tried matchstick.
horizontally levelled splints. Place, trolley
with empty wooden trays near machine,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
arranges them in machine frame with
Code 8122
mouth turned towards hopper of levelling
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
machine; locks levelling machine frame
Coating Machine Operators
over empty wooden trays securely; fills
match splints into hopper of levelling
8122.8000
machine; spreads splints evenly by hand
Splint Drying Chamberman (Match)
in hopper of machine; starts machine to
agitate hopper, side to side to fill empty
Splint Drying Chamberman (Match) Match trays with splints horizontally; removes
Splint Drying Machine Attendant tends wooden trays filled with levelled splints
drying and polishing machine to dry and and places them on rack of trolley for
polish match splints. Collects match further processing. Oils and greases
splints from bins and spreads them evenly machine.
in wooden chamber tray; opens bottom
door of drying chamber, pushes chamber ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
tray containing splints into its moving
Code 8122
platform and closes chamber door; starts
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
machine to blow steam or hot air to heat
Coating Machine Operators
furnace to desired temperature by
regulating thermostats or by adjusting
8122.9900
dampers; opens top door of chamber and
Metal Finishing, Plating and
removes chamber tray containing dried
Coating Machine Operators, Other
splints after specified length of fine; feeds
VOLUME II B 343
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Metal Finishing, Plating and Coating Chemical Products Plant and Machine
Machine Operators, Other perform Operators monitor and operate units and
number of routine and low skilled tasks, machinery to blend, mix, process and
such as fixing components in jigs, package a wide range of chemical
removing component from jigs, products.
degreasing and cleaning components by
scrubbing, drying them in saw dust, lifting 8131.0100
materials from acidulated water tank,
Crusher Operator, Chemical
feeding sheets in roller and furnace for
drying and heating of tin plate etc. and are
Crusher Operator, Chemical operates
designated as Jigger Un-Jigger, Plate
power driven crushing machine to break
Helper, Drier, Water Boy, Norton Roller
solid lumps of chemicals or other
Feeder, etc. according to nature of work
materials into smaller size for further
done.
processing. Collects material to be
crushed; fills hopper of machine by hand
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
or by operating mechanical feed; fixes
Code 8122
screen to machine to retain pieces which
Title Metal Finishing, Plating and
are too large. Operates controls to start,
Coating Machine Operators
stop and regulate speed of machine;
breaks oversize or jammed lumps with a
Group 813 hammer; discharges crushed material into
Chemical and Photographic outlet container-cleans crusher and work-
Products Plant and Machine area. May weigh the material before and
after crushing to know loss in crushing.
Operators
May be designated according to type of
process adopted/industry attached to.
Chemical and Photographic Products Plant
and Machine Operators operate and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
monitor machines which process a variety
Code 8131
of chemicals and other ingredients to
Title Chemical Products Plant and
produce pharmaceuticals, toiletries,
Machine Operators
explosives and photographic or other
chemical products.
8131.0200
Miller/Mill Operator (Chemical)
Occupations in this Group are classified
into the following Families:
Miller; Mill House Operator; Ball Mill
Attendant; Ball Mill Operator Grinder
8131 Chemical Products Plant and
(Chemical) feeds and tends a machine
Machine Operators
that grinds solid chemicals or other
8132 Photographic Products Machine
materials, used in chemical and related
Operators
processes, to reduce them to particles of
specified size. Selects and fits to machine
Family 8131
screens according to size of particles to be
Chemical Products Plant and produced; starts machine and feeds
Machine Operators material into mill; observes grinding
process, takes samples of ground material
VOLUME II B 344
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
to ensure that particles of required size hand or by operating valves, pumps or
are obtained; discharges ground material mechanical loaders; starts machine
into outlet container and supervises the agitators to mix materials thoroughly;
removal of ground material. May keep adds further ingredients, if required; runs
records of weight of material ground. machine until mixing process is
completed; removes mixture from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: machine container; cleans machine and
Code 8131 work area and prepares machine for fresh
Title Chemical Products Plant and run. Observes and reports abnormalities
Machine Operators in blending and mixing.
8131.0300 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Pulveriser Operator, Chemical Code 8131
Title Chemical Products Plant and
Machine Operators
Pulveriser Operator, Chemical;
Disintegrator Attendant, Chemical feeds
8131.0500
and tends power-driven pulverising
machine to reduce crushed chemicals or Compounding Man (Match)
other material into fine particles or dust.
Collects material; fixes screen to machine Compounding man (Match) operates a
according to fineness of powder particles grinding and mixing mill to make
to be produced. Starts machine and feeds compound for match heads and match
material into machine to pulverize kit to box sides according to formulae. Prepares
fine powder. Observes disintegrating glue solution and maintains it at specified
process, takes samples of pulverised temperature by keeping glue container in
material, and ensures that required boiler; weighs and measures chemical
fineness is being obtained. Discharges ingredients according to formulae; fills
disintegrated material into outlet ball mill with chemical ingredients and
container; cleans machine and work area. adds prescribed quantity of water to it;
closes lid of ball mill and secures it tightly;
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: starts mill by operating hand lever and
Code 8131 runs it for specified period to make
Title Chemical Products Plant and chemical paste; stops mill opens lid and
Machine Operators fills in glue solution. Closes lid of mill and
again runs it for required period to make
8131.0400 match head compound of required
consistency; stops mill and empties
Mixing Machine Man Attendant
prepared compound into empty drum
(Chemical)
placed below; places drum on platform of
mixing machine platform to place stirring
Mixing Machine Attendant, (Chemical)
rod of machine immersed inside
feeds and tends machine to mix and blend
composition drum; starts machine to
different solid or liquid ingredients in
agitate stirring rod to mix composition to
required proportions. Weighs ingredients
required consistency; stops machine when
according to formulae or specifications
ingredients are thoroughly mixed and
and feeds prescribed quantities of
removes drum to be collected by
ingredients into machine container by
VOLUME II B 345
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Composition Supplier or Tableman; keeps set to machine by Fitter; places empty
place clean and tidy. containers or bags at delivery end of each
sizing or grading compartment; starts
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: machine; maintains steady flow of powder
Code 8131 into sieve and pokes rod to remove blocks
Title Chemical Products Plant and as necessary; observes operations to
Machine Operators ensure correct sifting and sorting of
powder according to size of sieving mesh;
8131.0800 collects sifted materials according to
grades (coarse to fine particles) in bags
Sieving Machine Attendant,
and stores them in central place. Cleans
Chemical
machine with compressed air at close of
shift and keeps surroundings clean and
Sieving Machine Attendant, Chemical
tidy.
feeds crushed or ground chemical
material in sieving machine to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
automatically sift and collect sieved
Code 8131
material. Selects sieve of the specified
Title Chemical Products Plant and
size, suiting thickness or diameter of the
Machine Operators
sieve material; fixes sieve to the machine;
feeds crushed or ground material in
8131.1400
machine; starts machine to sift material
Drying Chamber Attendant
by required size; stops machine,
discharges sieved material, and arranges (Drugs)/Chamber Operators
its storing. May keep record of weights
and sizes of sieved material. May sieve Drying Chamber Attendant, Drug dries
material progressively to smaller and finer tables and powder in drying chamber.
sizes. May repair defective parts of Spreads out powder and tables evenly in
damaged sieves. trays and loads trays on racks and shelves
in drying chamber. Closes chamber and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: applies heat for fixed period of time;
Code 8131 checks at frequent intervals to ensure that
Title Chemical Products Plant and products are properly dried. Keeps drying
Machine Operators chamber clean.
8131.0900 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Grading Machine Attendant Code 8131
Title Chemical Products Plant and
(Abrasive)
Machine Operators
Grading Machine Attendant (Abrasive)
8131.1500
Shifting Machine Attendant (Abrasive)
Drying Chamber Attendant (Match
sifts and grades powdered ore or minerals
by machine for use as abrasive powder Boxes)/Chamber Operators
and collects them separately according to
their grades. Loads hopper of grading or Drying Chamber Attendant (Match Boxes)
sifting machine with powder ore; ensures tends a drying chamber machine to dry
that different grades or mesh of sieves are matchboxes by regulating speed of
VOLUME II B 346
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
conveyor inside drying chamber. Heats 8131.1800
and maintains drying chamber at desired Paste Maker
temperature by noting readings on meters
and gauges. Starts conveyor machine;
Paste Maker; Glue Cooker makes glue
places match boxes on conveyor belt to
paste, gum, or other adhesives according
carry them through heated chamber;
to formulae in steam jacketed kettles.
regulates speed of belt through chamber
Collects specified quantities of dry flour,
in accordance with temperature of
corn-starch, tapioca, washing soda,
chamber for product to dry. Examines
copper sulphate and other ingredients to
dried boxes coming out of chamber to
prepare desired adhesive paste. Prepares
ensure that they are dried to required
copper sulphate solution by mixing copper
quality. Makes necessary adjustments to
sulphate powder with specified quantity
machine and regulates movement of
of water; fills drum fitted with steam
conveyor in chamber as necessary. May
jacket with measured quantity of dry
clean and oil conveyor system.
ingredients according to formulae and
adds requisite quantity of water and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
copper sulphate solution in it; closes lid of
Code 8131 drum and opens steam valve to admit
Title Chemical Products Plant and steam into it for boiling solution for
Machine Operators specified period observing thermometer
to maintain required temperature; opens
8131.1700 valve to drain solution into container
Size Maker (Abrasive) when specified consistency is obtained.
May draw off and send sample of glue to
Size Maker (Abrasive); Mixing Machine Chemist for test.
Man (Abrasive) prepares sizing mixture
and ensures its continuous supply to sizing ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine (abrasive). Weighs and measures Code 8131
sizing materials such as glue, resin, Title Chemical Products Plant and
varnish, solvents, water, etc. as per Machine Operators
formulae and fills them in heating kettle
or tank fitted with steam pipes; opens 8131.2100
steam valve to heat kettle and boil Ammonia Operator/Ammonia
ingredients; allows ingredients to mix and
Plant Operator
boil for prescribed period; stops supply of
steam after set period; opens outlet or
Ammonia Operator controls converter
drain valve of kettle or tank to drain and
and auxiliary equipment that combine
maintain regular supply of glue to sizing
hydrogen and nitrogen to produce
machine; cleans tank and keeps place
anhydrous ammonia: Lights burner and
clean and tidy.
starts pumps, compressors, scrubbers,
and absorption units. Moves controls on
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
panel board to regulate temperatures of
Code 8131
solutions and opens valves to admit
Title Chemical Products Plant and
heated and purified air and hydrogen into
Machine Operators
combustion chamber of burner, where
nitrogen driven from air combines with
VOLUME II B 347
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
hydrogen to form ammonia. Reads warped fuel elements, containing
instruments, such as thermometers, radioactive uranium, using hydraulic ram
pressure gauges, and potentiometers. straightener.
Makes control adjustments according to
operating instructions and charts. Pumps ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
fresh solutions into scrubbing and Code 8131
absorption towers when readings indicate Title Chemical Products Plant and
excessive alkalinity. Records operational Machine Operators
data in logbook. May compute percentage
of hydrogen and ammonia in burner 8131.2300
gases, using standard test procedure.
Filter Press Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Filter Press Operator operates filter press
Code 8131
machine to filter impurities or other
Title Chemical Products Plant and
insoluble materials from slurries, chemical
Machine Operators
solutions or mother liquids. Opens filter
press and covers filter plates with canvas,
8131.2200
paper or other filtering media; closes
Heat Treater press and ensures that its joints make a
liquid tight seal; adds diatomaceous earth,
Heat Treater controls heat-treating saw dust, other settling compound to
furnaces, baths and quenching equipment solution to precipitate impurities; pumps
to alter physical and chemical properties when specified pressure is reached.
of metal objects, using specifications and Removes filtered impurities from screen
methods of controlled heating and with compressed air, water or steam, and
cooling, such as hardening, tempering, dislodges solid materials caught between
annealing, case-hardening, and frames. Occasionally replaces damaged
normalizing: Determines temperature and filter media and adjusts and makes minor
time of heating cycle, and type and repairs to equipment.
temperature of baths and quenching
medium to attain specified hardness, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
toughness, and ductility of parts, using Code 8131
standard heat-treating charts, and utilizing Title Chemical Products Plant and
knowledge of heat-treating methods, Machine Operators
equipment, and properties of metals.
Adjusts furnace controls and observes 8131.2400
pyrometer to bring furnace to prescribed
Filter Press Operator (Ceramics)
temperature. Loads parts into furnace.
Removes parts after prescribed time and
Filter Press Operator (Ceramics) operates
quenches parts in water, oil, brine, or
filter press to filter and separate clay from
other bath, or allows parts to cool in air.
water in slip. Covers filter plates of press
May test hardness of parts. May set up
with cloth or canvas; closes press, causing
and operate die-quenching machine to
plates to come together, forming seal;
prevent parts from warping. May set up
starts machine and opens valve to pump
and operate electronic induction
slip into filter press, where clay is retained
equipment to heat objects. May align
and water is squeezed out through
VOLUME II B 348
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
filtering media; stops machine when with canvas, wire cloth, or other filtering
specified pressure is indicated on gauges media), rotating valves to control vacuum
or when all slip in tank is pumped into in drum to draw liquid through filtering
press completely; opens filter press plates media and hold solid particles on drum.
and removes pressed clay between plates. Observes intake side of drum to ascertain
Cleans press and replaces damaged filter that scrapers remove solids from drum.
cloth or camods. Adjusts drum rotation, lifter feed, or
vacuum to obtain clear filtrate. May add
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: chemicals to destroy bacterial growth.
Code 8131 May tend washing sprays, setters or
Title Chemical Products Plant and related equipment. May make minor
Machine Operators repairs to equipment. May be designated
according to type of solution filtered or
8131.2500 solid separated.
Strainer, Liquid
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8131
Strainer, Liquid filters liquids or solutions
Title Chemical Products Plant and
through strainers or filter papers to
Machine Operators
remove impurities and foreign matter.
Selects and places strainer, covered with
8131.2700
canvas, cloth, paper or mother filtering
media below outlet of cooker; mixes and Hydro Extractor Operator
agitates saw dust or mother settling
compound with solution to precipitate Hydro Extractor Operator, Centrifuge
impurities; opens outlet valve to permit Operator operates centrifuge machine
material to filter through strainer into that separates solids from liquids, or
tubs or other containers; cleans and liquids of different specific gravity. Fills
replaces filters. May be designated drum of machine with liquid material.
according to material treated such as Starts machine and adjusts drum speed to
STRAINER, RUBBER; STRAINER PAPER obtain efficient separation of substances;
PULP; STRAINER CANNING AND FOOD empties containers when separation is
PRESERVATION, etc. completed. May fix and clean filtering
media in machine, operate heating
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: attachment on machine and test samples
Code 8131 for moisture content. May be designated
Title Chemical Products Plant and according to type of materials separated.
Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8131.2600 Code 8131
Box Filtration Operator Title Chemical Products Plant and
Machine Operators
Box Filtration Operator; Filterman, Liquid;
8131.2800
Filterer, Rotary Drum filters liquids, using
rotary drum filtering screen. Opens valves Crude Oil Treater (Oil Field)
to regulate flow of solution into filter
tanks and starts drums (which are covered
VOLUME II B 349
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Crude Oil Treater (Oil Field) treats crude minor repairs to apparatus and
oil at wells in chemical, electrical or equipment. May undertake tests
centrifugal units to remove sediment and independently. May assist Chemist to
water. Tests oil for contents of sediment conduct research work. May store,
and water using gravity-separation maintain account of instruments,
machines and according to result of test equipment, apparatus, etc. if required.
switches oil through treating units, to and
from storage tanks or into pipe lines. Adds ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
chemicals to chemical treating unit or Code 8131
routes oil through electrical or centrifugal Title Chemical Products Plant and
units to break up oil and water emulsions Machine Operators
and drain off water. Precipitates sediment
in settling tanks. Gauges tanks to 8131.3000
determine quantity of oil treated and
Disc Operator (Abrasive)
delivered to pipe lines. Operates and
maintains water and oil pumps of treating
Disc Operator (Abrasive) operates
unit. Cleans and makes repairs to units.
machine, which uses steel shot for
Records production results of tests and
producing flat surface on abrasive wheels
other data. May operate oil heaters to
prior to or sometimes as an alternative to
raise oil to desired temperature for
turning. Mounts abrasive wheel on
treating. May pump wells.
rotating spindle of machine and sets
retaining plate ring to keep emery wheel
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
at one point; manipulates levers to lower
Code 8131
moveable arm of machine over abrasive
Title Chemical Products Plant and
wheel to hold it tightly in position; fills
Machine Operators
hopper of machine with steel grits; starts
machine, opens bottom plate and
8131.2900
regulates flow of steel grits over rotating
Gauger (Cement) wheel of machine. Observes, frequently
during operation, grinding and
Gauger (Cement) conducts simple tests of smoothening of surface of abrasive wheel
samples of cement in laboratory for on rotating platform of machine with steel
physical properties at different stages of grits and blows off deposited dust and
production. Collects samples of material, powder with compressed air as necessary;
weighs and mixes ingredients to prepare checks thickness and surface of abrasive
moulds for laboratory test. Sets apparatus wheel with measuring instruments such as
and conducts routine tests to determine callipers, gauges, to ensure correct size
physical properties such as compression, and finish; stops machine and removes
tensile strength, setting time etc., of abrasive wheel when required flatness is
cement at various stages of production. obtained. May clean and oil machines.
Adds or eliminates ingredients as directed
by Chemist to remove defects and raise ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
quality of product. Maintains readings and Code 8131
observations for calculations and Title Chemical Products Plant and
reference purposes. Cleans and maintains Machine Operators
apparatus in good condition. May do
VOLUME II B 350
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8131.3100 content. Admits salt water and specified
Crude-Oil Treater (Petrol and Gas) amounts of liquid chemicals, such as
caustic soda or acid, to mixing tank to
produce brine solution meeting plant
Crude-Oil Treater (Petrol and Gas)
standard. Pumps solution to settling tank
Operator; pumper; treater Operates
to settle out impurities and through sand-
chemical, electrical, and centrifugal oil-
bed filters for final purification. Draws
treatment units to remove sediment and
sample of brine for laboratory analysis or
water from crude oil before transporting
tests density, salt content, and acidity,
oil by pipeline to refineries: Opens valves
using hydrometer, salinometer, and pH
and starts pumps to pump oil from
meter. Turns valves to transfer brine to
storage tanks to treating units. Opens
electrolytic cells and maintain brine at
valves to mix specified chemicals with oil,
specified levels in supply lines, tanks, and
and adjusts controls to heat mixture to
cells. May dump materials into brine to
specified temperature. Starts centrifugal
adjust chemical composition to plant
machines that break up oil and water
standard, using titration test to determine
emulsions and drain off water. Opens
strength of solution. May pump water
valves and starts pumps to transfer oil
through resin and carbon beds to
into settling tanks where sediment is
demineralise it. May tend heat exchanger
precipitated from oil. Tests sample in
to maintain temperature of brine within
gravity-or centrifugal-separation machine
specified limits.
to determine content of oil specified for
pipeline transportation. Pumps treated oil
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
into pipelines leading to refinery. Cleans
and lubricates motors, pumps, and other Code 8131
moving parts of units. Records data, such Title Chemical Products Plant and
as volume of oil treated, operating Machine Operators
temperatures of units, and test results.
May operate pumps at oil well sites. May 8131.3501
tend treating-plant equipment to remove Autoclave Operator
impurities from natural gas.
Autoclave Operator; Sterilisation
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Attendant charges, operates and unloads
Code 8131 an autoclave (high-pressure vessel) for
Title Chemical Products Plant and processing chemicals, oils, or sterilising
Machine Operators bottles, ampoules, etc. Charges or loads
vessel with predetermined quantities of
8131.3200 chemicals or objects; checks valves for
Brine Maker (Chemical) operation; raises temperature of
autoclave by increasing steam pressure.
Observes pressure and temperature
Brine Maker (Chemical) tends tanks,
gauges, thermometers, timings and other
filters, and auxiliary equipment that
instruments and makes necessary
produce brine solution for use in
adjustments to ensure that process or
electrolytic cells: Pumps water through
sterilization is carried out correctly.
salt beds or starts conveyor bringing salt
Unloads product on completion of process
from storage area for dissolution in water,
and prepares vessel for next batch.
producing mixture of specified salt
VOLUME II B 351
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Implements safety measures in regard to ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
operation of plant/machinery and in Code 8131
handling and processing materials, and Title Chemical Products Plant and
maintains machinery. May keep records. Machine Operators
May be designated according to product
processed or sterilized. 8131.3700
Reactor Convertor Operator
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q0210
Reactor Converter Operator (Chemical
QP NOS Name Autoclave Operator
Process, except Petr oleum) operates or
NSQF Level 4
tends number of pieces of equipment,
other than those used for treating
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
petroleum, which perform sequence of
Code 8131 complex operations in chemical reaction
Title Chemical Products Plant and process. Regulates feed of gaseous, liquid
Machine Operators or solid material into equipment. Checks
progress of process by looking through
8131.3600 peep holes, observing temperature
Evaporator Operator readings, pressure gauges and other
instruments and making simple chemical
Evaporator Operator; Pan Operator; tests. Regulates material feed and heating
Vacuum Pan Operator charges and or cooling devices and makes other
operates evaporating tank, vacuum-pan adjustments as necessary to ensure that
or similar device to concentrate solutions processes are correctly carried out.
by driving off excess water contents.
Pumps weak (liquid) solution into ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
evaporator tank or pan; operates vacuum Code 8131
pump to obtain vacuum in pan, if Title Chemical Products Plant and
required; regulates flow of steam into Machine Operators
heater coils of evaporator; periodically
tests concentrations of solution by use of 8131.3800
instruments or by making simple chemical Converter Operator (Grain-Feed
tests; makes necessary adjustments to
Mills)
temperature and pressure to obtain
required solution; pumps concentrated
Converter Operator (Grain-Feed Mills)
solution from evaporator for auxiliary
controls converter to change starch into
heating. Implements safety measures in
glucose or corn syrup, and tests products
regard to operation of plant/machinery
to verify purity (specified dextrose
and in handling and processing materials,
content): Turns valves to admit steam and
oils and maintains machinery. May tend
water into converter. Introduces starch
auxiliary equipment such as settling tanks,
into converter so that cooking occurs as
preheating tanks, condensers and cooling
starch is added. Detects from sound of
equipment. May treat solutions, such as
cooking process formation of paste, and
those of glue, glycerine, glucose and
adds acid, as necessary, to reduce
caustic soda and be designated
viscosity. Closes converter and turns valve
accordingly.
to attain specified pressure. Draws off
VOLUME II B 352
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
samples, and makes standard iodine and Continuous Machine Operator (Match Box
alcohol titration tests. Turns valves to Manufacturing); Continuous Machine
blow syrup into tank when tests indicate Driver (Matches) operates continuous
conversion is complete. machine to dip match splints in liquid
paraffin and match-head composition, dry
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and deliver them in finished form. Checks
Code 8131 supply of liquid paraffin into machine;
Title Chemical Products Plant and ensures that composition tank of machine
Machine Operators contains match-head composition to
prescribed level and that magazine of
8131.3900 machine is kept continuously full with
match splints; turns hand wheel to adjust
Distiller (Chemical)
machine to immerse match splints to
specified depth in match head compound.
Distiller (Chemical) controls continuous
Sets thermostat or thermometer in
still equipment to distil pine oleoresin into
compound dip tank and turns steam and
oil of turpentine and rosin: Turns valves to
cold-water valves to regulate compound
transfer heated oleoresin from melting
temperature and viscosity. Starts
vats into cleaning, filtering, and washing
machine; compares size of match heads
tanks to clean, filter, and wash trash,
passing on conveyor with drawings of
foreign matter, and other impurities from
acceptable match heads and cuts
resin preparatory to distillation. Pours
unacceptable matches from conveyor
specified amounts of oxalic acid into tanks
with long handled push knife; raises or
to facilitate cleansing process, using
lowers conveyor or dip roll to immerse
graduated cylinder. Drains impurities from
match splints in bath of paraffin and then
wash tanks and starts pump that forces
in match head composition. Observes and
resin into still. Turns valve to circulate
ensures drying of match-head in drying
water through steam jackets. Observes
chamber at specified temperature; drains
temperature gauge and turns valve to
and washes dip tanks to remove
regulate heat to specified temperature to
thickened compound. May replenish
condense turpentine vapours. Turns valve
compounds and paraffin in dip tank.
to drain rosin from still. Observes sample
of distillate for clarity and separation of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
turpentine from oleoresin to determine
Code 8131
completion of distillation. Occasionally
Title Chemical Products Plant and
replaces filters in tank and cleans tank as
Machine Operators
necessary.
8131.4100
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Receiver (Match)
Code 8131
Title Chemical Products Plant and
Machine Operators Receiver (Match) receives dried match
sticks coming out of continuous machine
8131.4000 in trays for delivering them to Box Filling
Section. Pushes trolley containing empty
Continuous Machine Operator
trays to side of continuous machine;
(Match Box Manufacturing)
keeps empty trays on carrier of
VOLUME II B 353
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
continuous machine for filling them with types of veneers (rim and bottom) have to
dried match sticks; collects filled trays be fed simultaneously.
from carrier and replaces them with
empty trays from trolley; dresses match ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sticks in trays evenly by padding them by Code 8131
hand or with flat wooden piece; removes Title Chemical Products Plant and
damaged and incomplete stick; arranges Machine Operators
filled trays on trolley racks and pushes
loaded trolley to specified point; ensures 8131.4300
that paraffin level in continuous machine
Box Filling Machine Operator
is maintained at prescribed level and fills
(Match)
container with liquid paraffin as necessary
by opening paraffin tank tap.
Box Filling Machine Operator (Match); Box
Filling Machine Man (Match) operates Box
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Filling Machine which automatically fills
Code 8131
match boxes with prescribed number of
Title Chemical Products Plant and
match sticks and delivers filled and closed
Machine Operators
boxes. Starts machine by operating hand
lever; checks feeding of empty match
8131.4200
boxes into moving chain plate of machine
Box Making Machine Operator
and ensures that they are automatically
(Match) opened; collects tray containing arranged
match sticks and feeds magazine of
Box Making Machine Operator (Match) machine with sticks in same order of
operates power driven machine to fold arrangement by removing bottom plate of
veneers, paste them with paper and make tray; checks movement of open boxes
complete outer and inner match-boxes. over chain plate and observes filling of
Collects outer, bottom and rim veneers specified number of sticks in boxes and
and examines them for defects. Positions closing filled boxes automatically;
roll of blue paper on feed rack of machine removes by hand unfilled and damaged
and draws end of paper from roll over boxes; ensures that filled and closed
feed rollers; fills glue reservoir of machine boxes are collected at delivery end and
and regulates flow of glue; feeds machine are removed for further processing.
with sorted and dressed veneers, outer Maintains continuous feed of magazine
rim or bottom as required; starts machine with arranged match sticks and stops
by operating hand levels or by pressing machine when operation completed.
electric button, ensuring that glue flows Cleans and oils machine. May do minor
uniformly over blue paper, veneers move adjustments to machine.
singly, folds and pasted properly, and
finished outer and inner boxes carried ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
over conveyor system ensuring that Code 8131
operation proceeds correctly, making Title Chemical Products Plant and
necessary adjustments to machine. May Machine Operators
operate outer box making machine or
inner box making machine where two 8131.4400
Friction Machine Operator (Match)
VOLUME II B 354
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
stops machine if boxes get jammed over
Friction Machine Operator (Match) conveyor system, removes defects and
operates friction machine which applies continues operation.
friction composition on sides of match box
and dries them in drying chamber of ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine. Fills composition container of Code 8131
machine with required quantity of friction Title Chemical Products Plant and
compound; checks machine pump to Machine Operators
ensure that friction solution is pumped
over rollers at regular intervals; adjusts 8131.4600
rollers, or aligns and fastens brushes, in
Band roll and Labelling Machine
machine; positions roll of levelled and
Operator
band-rolled match boxes on feed
conveyor; starts machine and observes
Banderol and Labelling Machine Operator
coating of friction compound on two sides
operates or sets up and operates on
of match box and drying in drying
automatic machine that glues trade
chamber; examines dried boxes coming
labelling banderol papers (excise duty
out of drying chamber for defects and
papers) to filled matchboxes. Adjusts feed
makes adjustments to machine for proper
hoppers and guides according to size of
operation. Cleans and oils machine.
label and match boxes to be labelled;
Changes applicator plate according to size
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
of labels, regulates feeding mechanism
Code 8131
and pressure of applicator rollers. Fills
Title Chemical Products Plant and
glue reservoir and loads labels and filled
Machine Operators
match boxes into machine; starts
machine, observes operation and makes
8131.4500
adjustments if necessary; removes
Box Closing Machine Operator
jammed boxes or twisted labels from
(Match) machine.
Box Closing Machine Operator (Match) ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
operates automatic matchbox closing Code 8131
machine to fit and close inner match box Title Chemical Products Plant and
case into outer match box cover. Starts Machine Operators
machine and checks and ensures proper
feeding of inner and outer boxes into 8131.4900
machine. Observes movement of inner
Coke Oven Operator, Controller
and outer match box covers from bins
over conveyors and their getting tilted
Controlman, Coke Oven records meter
into correct position, and inner case
and gauge readings and controls pressure
pushed inside outer cover; removes by
and draft in coke ovens. Watches readings
hand damaged or broken boxes from
of thermo-couple recorders, pressure
conveyor and deposits them in waste
gauges, governors etc., and reports
container; collects completed boxes at
irregularities to Heater. Arranges for gas
delivery end of machine and arranges
reversion. Adjusts and maintains gas
them in trays for removal to filling section;
pressure and air draft after gas reversal.
VOLUME II B 355
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Checks working of chimney governors, 8131.5800
foul gas governors and operates butterfly Producer Gas Plant Operator
valves to prevent fluctuation of pressure
inside coke oven battery. Checks
Producer Gas Plant Operator operates
deposition of tar in collecting main and
producer gas plant for manufacture of
arranges for its cleaning. Keeps in touch
producer gas from burning coal for
with blast furnace, coke oven gas holders,
metallurgical or other purposes Ignites
booster house and other departments to
coal, opens valves and injects steam and
maintain flow of correct volume and
air on red hot coal by blower. Watches
pressure of gas into coke ovens. Keeps
frequently quality of gas produced.
record of all pressure, draft and volume
Removes ash by operating mechanical ash
readings. May instruct Gas Man for
plough. Operates gas release valve and
operating gas reversal clock. May
directs gas to gas main, for distribution to
manually operate butterfly valves, if there
sections concerned or to gas chamber.
is no governor. May also arrange for
Records readings of meters, thermo-
cleaning spray nozzles and cocks for
coupled indicators and gauges to assess
proper flow of gases.
quality, quantity and pressure of gas. May
also introduce gas into new furnace and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
inspect furnace glues.
Code 8131
Title Chemical Products Plant and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Machine Operators
Code 8131
Title Chemical Products Plant and
8131.5600
Machine Operators
Charcoal Burner, Beehive Kiln
(Chemical) 8131.5900
Bale Cutter Operator, Rubber
Charcoal Burner, Beehive Kiln (Chemical)
operates series of beehive kilns to Bale Cutter Operator, Rubber cuts bales of
produce charcoal: Places kindling in kiln crude rubber into small pieces by hand or
and starts fire. Seals top of kiln when hydraulic cutting press. Removes wired
specified heat is attained, using cement wooden wrapping or metal straps, using
and hand trowel. Observes colour of cutters covering from rubber bales and
smoke as it issues through draft holes in loads them on machine; pushes bale on
kiln bottom to ensure burning of charcoal bed of cutting machine and moves lever,
as specified. Opens and closes draft holes, actuating hydraulic ram that pushes bale
using bricks, to regulate forming of against stationary knives or to lower knife
charcoal. Seals draft holes and cracks in or blades against rubber placed on
kiln with cement to smother fire when platform of machine; pulls layers of
charcoal has been formed smoked or crepe rubber apart by hand
and completes operation; collects cut
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: pieces, loads them in truck and moves
Code 8131 truck to hot chamber for further
Title Chemical Products Plant and processing; cleans, oils and lubricates
Machine Operators machine and keeps work place neat and
tidy.
VOLUME II B 356
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Straining Operator (Rubber Reclaim);
Code 8131 Strainer Man screens out metal particles
Title Chemical Products Plant and and other foreign objects from processed
Machine Operators rubber reclaim, using strainer. Opens
chute on feed conveyors or shovels, scrap
8131.6000 rubber into hopper of strainer, starts
machine that forces rubber through
Masticator, Rubber
strainer screen; regulates speed of
machine and conveyors to prevent
Masticator, Rubber; Mixing Mill Operator
jamming of stock; feels strainer, and
(Rubber) tends and operates plasticator
opens water valves to prevent over-
machine that mangles and kneads chunks
heating of machine and scorching rubber;
of raw rubber between two mill rollers to
discharges strained scrap rubber to
prepare raw rubber for compounding with
conveyors to transfer to refining mills or
other ingredients for further processing.
to hand trucks for transfer to storage;
Weighs specified amount of raw rubber
observes for colour and appearance and
chunks and dumps them into hopper of
feels strained rubber to insure that
machine; turns steam and water valves to
foreign material is removed; replaces
regulate heat of machine rollers, judges
clogged and worn strainer screens, using
heat by touch; adjusts roll clearance for
hand tools. May tend magnetic device to
desired thickness of stock; starts machine
facilitate removal of metal from rubber.
and feeds stock through rollers to squeeze
May fill containers with screened rubber
and knead material; pulls out warm stock
to specified weight and keep record of
in chunks at expiration of prescribed time
productions.
or when visual examination shows
material is satisfactorily milled; removes
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sheet rubber adhering to heated roll by
Code 8131
cutting across it with knife and catching
Title Chemical Products Plant and
sheet as roll turns, or adjusting tension of
Machine Operators
scraper blade, that peels rubber from roll,
by turning hand wheel; dips slabs in soap
8131.6200
stone bath and hangs them for drying. Oils
and cleans machine; keeps work Mixer, Rubber/Mill Operator
surroundings neat and tidy. May
manipulate controls of automatic feed Mixer, Rubber/Mill Operator makes
delivery system. rubber compound by mixing crude rubber
with other ingredients such as filters,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: antioxidants, plasticizers, activators,
Code 8131 retarders, accelerators, sulphur etc., by
Title Chemical Products Plant and operating a mixing mill. Sets machine by
Machine Operators adjusting roll clearance for desired
thickness of milled stock; turns water
8131.6100 valves to regulate temperature of rolls;
shovels batch of processed stock into feed
Straining Operator (Rubber
hopper of mill; adds previously prepared
Reclaim)
liquid and solid pigment to aid
plasticisation, using hand paddle; starts
VOLUME II B 357
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
mill and observes continuous pressing of 8131.6400
stock between rolls; pulls out warm stock Synthetic Fibre Maker
in chunks at expiration of prescribed time
or when visual examination shows
Synthetic Fibre Maker tends machine that
material is satisfactorily milled; hangs
forces specific liquid solution through fine
rubber chunks on racks to cool; removes
holes into acid solidifying bath to form
cool stock from rack and places them on
synthetic (chemical) textile filaments and
storage skids, separating layers with soap
winds them into untwisted threads. Starts
stone; adjusts and controls roll gap if
machine and catches ends of filaments as
machine stops due to over feeding; stops
they pass through acid bath. Brings
machine when layer of rubber strip on
several ends together, passes them over
roller is exhausted; oils and lubricates
guide wheel and attaches them to spool,
machine.
bobbin or similar winding device. Repeats
process with other filaments. Ties thread
Qualification Pack Details:
together when it breaks and replaces. Fills
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q0101 winding devices with empty ones. May
QP NOS Name Mill Operator operate machine with centrifugal
NSQF Level 4 arrangement for drawing and piling
thread into special boxes.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8131 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Chemical Products Plant and Code 8131
Machine Operators Title Chemical Products Plant and
Machine Operators
8131.6300
Solution and Dough Making, 8131.6500
Operator, Rubber Refining Machine Operator (Oils
and Fats)/Oil and Fat Plant
Solution and Dough Making Operator Operator
Rubber; Solution Maker; Rubber dissolves
rubber compound in solvent and then
Refining Machine Operator (Oils and Fats)
mixes it in solution mill. Pours required
tends machine to refine crude oils such as,
quantity of solvent in mill chamber; adds
ground-nut pea-nut, soya-bean etc., for
specified quantity of rubber compound
preservation or for making hydrogenated
into solvent in chamber of mill; starts
oil. Turns valve to pump oil and caustic
machine; runs machine for specified
solution from storage tanks into machine
period of time or until mixing process is
tanks as specified. Starts machine to
completed; draws samples to test solution
separate caustic from oil by centrifugal
for proper consistency; stops machine and
force. Sets thermostat, observes gauges
drains solution from chamber.
and regulates valves to maintain
prescribed temperature in wash and dryer
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
tanks. Turns valves to pump mixtures to
Code 8131 wash and dryer tanks to remove by-
Title Chemical Products Plant and products with water and impurities with
Machine Operators heat. Turns valve to pump refined oil to
storage tanks or for further processing.
VOLUME II B 358
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Cleans vessels, using water and steam. 8131.6700
May be designated according to type of Deodorizer
machine tended.
Deodorizer; Deodorizing Plant Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
(Oil and Fats) tends distilling equipment to
Code 8131 deodorize processed oils used in
Title Chemical Products Plant and manufacture of margarine, Vanaspati etc.,
Machine Operators and shortening. Turns valves to admit
steam to heat oils to specified
8131.6600 temperature, introduces and mixes
Hydrogenation Operator (Oil and nitrogen and create and maintains
Fats)/Oil and Fat Plant Operator specified pressure and vacuum to remove
fatty acids and gases from oil. Watches
operation through inspection holes and
Hydrogenation Operator (Oils and Fats)
ensures separation of fatty acids. Gets
controls equipment to process base oils
samples tested and finished oil
used in manufacture of margarine,
transferred to filling section. May direct
Vanaspati, etc., and shortening. Starts
draining of fatty acids and residue for
pumps to move premeasured batches of
manufacture of by-products.
refined oils or fats into converter vessel.
Turns valves to adjust rate of flow of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
hydrogen, steam, air, and water into
converter and weighs and adds specified Code 8131
amounts of catalytic agents and other Title Chemical Products Plant and
chemicals to hardened batch of oils or Machine Operators
fats, as required. Tests samples, of batch
using refractometer to ensure that 8131.6800
hardness of product is in accordance with Crystallisation Attendant
specifications. Pumps harden oil through
filter press to remove catalyst and Crystallisation Attendant removes mother
attaches lines to transfer filtered oil to liquor, syrup etc., from chemical solution
blending vessel. Starts pumps to add and collects crystals formed. Operates
specified amounts of blending oils to valves to allow required quantity of
blending vessel and turns valves, to heat heated liquor (chemical solution) to enter
and blend oils, for required period of time. crystallisation tank. Starts stirrers in tank
Observes temperature and pressure to agitate liquor. Admits cooling water to
gauges and turns valves to make coils in tank, ensuring that liquor is cooled
adjustments when necessary. Pumps evenly and at controlled rate over fixe d
finished oils through filter press to holding period of time. Stops machine when
tank. May be designated according to required state of crystallisation has been
equipment controlled. obtained, and drains off contents. May
add crystals to induce crystallisation.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8131 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Chemical Products Plant and Code 8131
Machine Operators Title Chemical Products Plant and
Machine Operators
VOLUME II B 359
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8131.7000 coating substance. Operates machine to
Tablet Machine Operator rotate pot for required time to ensure
even coating. Checks that tablets are
coated; adds powder that adheres to
Tablet Machine Operator; Granulator
tablets polish surface of coated tablets by
Operator; Punch Machine Operator sets,
rotating them in wax-coated churn. May
feeds, operates tablet coating machine
coat pills with powdered sugar, French
and operates tablet-making machine to
chalk (pearl coating) or sulphur.
compress powders into tablets of
prescribed size, shape and weight. Sets
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine; regulates the pressure by
adjusting lever according to depth of Code 8131
tablets to be made; selects, fixes and Title Chemical Products Plant and
adjusts die and punch of specified size and Machine Operators
shape. Feeds and regulates flow of
prescribed quantity of material into 8131.7200
hopper of machine. Starts machine and Ampoule Machine/Plant Operator
sets die in motion for compressing
powdered material into tablets; regulates Washing Machine Operator, Ampoules
valves to control flow of tablets through sets and operates washing machine to
funnel; places empty container at delivery wash ampoules, vials, etc. to free them
end of machine to receive pressed tablets. from bacteria. Washes vials and ampoules
Test checks, at periodical intervals, weight with soap, water and brush; again cleans
of pressed tablets by weighing in vials and ampoules with water; fills glass
balances. May deliver finished and carboil with distilled water and connects it
pressed tablets at store for packing. May with the washing machine by a rubber
clean and maintain machine. May deliver tube. Starts the air compressor and
finished and pressed tablets at store for adjusts levers to maintain required
packing. May clean and maintain machine. pressure, releases the valve and finally
May operate tablet coating machine. washes and cleans vials and ampoules
with distilled water. Removes cleaned
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: vials into trays. May attend to their
Code 8131 physical testing and packing.
Title Chemical Products Plant and
Machine Operators ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8131
8131.7100 Title Chemical Products Plant and
Tablet Coater Machine Operators
Tablet Coater; Pill Coater coats 8131.7500
compressed tablets or pills with syrup or M.B. Tester
other substance to preserve ingredients
and make them palatable. Fills coating pot MB Tester; Mythelene Blue Tester tests
or pan of machine with tablets or pills. tightness of sealed ampoules by
Pours measured quantity of syrup or other immersing them in Mythelene blue
coating substance on tablets and starts solution. Places trays with filled ampoules
pot revolving to coat tablets with syrup or and Mythelene blue solution in vacuum
VOLUME II B 360
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
chamber solution; operates valves to instruments and making simple chemical
create vacuum and allows trays to remain tests; regulates material feed and heating
in chamber for specified period. Removes or cooling devices, as necessary; removes
and washes ampoules in clean water; acid when process is completed. May
examines and rejects ampoules containing keep records. May be designated
blue solution; according to product or process, e.g.
SULPHURIC ACID PLANT OPERATOR;
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: HYDROCHLORIC ACID PLANT OPERATOR;
Code 8131 FERTILISER MAKER; PHOSPHORUS MAKER.
Title Chemical Products Plant and
Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8131.7600 Code 8131
Optical Examiner, Ampoules Title Chemical Products Plant and
Machine Operators
8131.7800
Optical Examiner, Ampoules examines
filled ampoules for clarity of solution. Sulphur Burner
Holds ampoules against light; examines
them visually for dirt and impurities and Sulphur Burner melts sulphur in tanks by
rejects defective ampoules. May fill and steam to make molten sulphur or sulphur
seal ampoules. gas for making sulphuric acid. Charges
furnace with sulphur; regulates gas
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: burners to adjust temperature; adjusts
Code 8131 valves to pass air over vaporised sulphur
Title Chemical Products Plant and and form sulphur dioxide. Pumps water
Machine Operators over baffle plates in furnace, gas being
absorbed by water to form sulphuric acid.
8131.7700 Pumps acid into storage tanks. May melt
sulphur in tanks containing steam heated
Acid Plant Operator
coils and load furnace with molten
sulphur. May make periodic titration to
Acid Plant Operator maintains and
determine concentration of gas in water.
operates acid plant for manufacturing
sulphuric, hydrochloric, nitric or other
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
acids by treating raw materials (sulphur,
Code 8131
salts, etc.) with acid or steam. Collects
Title Chemical Products Plant and
required amount of raw materials for
Machine Operators
preparation of desired acid. Sets up and
checks equipment, valves, gauges and
8131.8000
other instruments; charges vessel with
predetermined amount of chemicals, or Acid Concentrator
regulates feed of materials into
equipment; controls temperature in Acid Concentrator maintains and operates
vessel by adjusting steam pressure; checks equipment to concentrate or purify liquid
progress of process by looking through chemicals. Charges retort with liquid to be
peep holes, observing temperature processed; adjusts temperature control
readings, pressure gauges and other valves to heat and vaporise liquid; skims
VOLUME II B 361
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
waste material from surface of liquid in and automatic recorders are maintained.
retort; feeds vaporized liquid through Replaces any damaged tubing and washes
condensers to condense it; if cell surfaces with water or acid to clean
concentrating chemical, occasionally tests them. Measures specific gravity of caustic
specific gravity of liquid in retort. soda solution produced by cell group,
Observes gauges, records readings and using hydrometer or by calorimetric
makes any needed operating changes. titration and adjusts cell operation
Inspects and makes minor repairs to accordingly. May be designated according
piping, pumps, blowers and condensers; to type of cell tended, as HOOKER-CELL
installs clean burners in furnace. ATTENDANT, MERCURY-CELL ATTENDANT,
GIBBS-CELL ATTENDANT.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8131 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Chemical Products Plant and Code 8131
Machine Operators Title Chemical Products Plant and
8131.8100 Machine Operators
Acid Worker, Other
8131.8300
Acid Worker, Other performs various Gas Storage Attendant
operations such as charging containers
with materials, controlling temperature, Gas Storage Attendant operates pumps
regulating movement of products, reading and equipment to store gas. Maintains
gauges, operating valves and controls, constant pressure in gas storage tank and
emptying containers, etc. under compensates for withdrawal of gas by
supervision of foreman or works chemist. commercial users by observing pressure
May keep records. May be designated gauges on tank and pumping replacement
according to duties or product, e.g. ACID quantities into tank as needed. Observes
LOADER; ACID PUMP MAN; STILL MAN; pressure gauges on storage tank to
DISTILLER; determine need for increasing or
SOLVENT RECOVERY OPERATOR; BRINE decreasing pressure, opens valves in gas-
MAN, POTASH. lines, and permits gas to flow into and out
of pumps. Adjusts valves on gas or steam
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: engines or throws electric switch to
Code 8131 control appropriate high or low-pressure
Title Chemical Products Plant and pumps in achieving desired pressure.
Machine Operators Reads gas meters and records amount of
gas received and dispensed from holders.
8131.8200 Adjusts and lubricates pumps and prime
movers. May adjust governors, to
Cell Room Attendant, Chemical
maintain desired pressure.
Cell Room Attendant Chemical tends
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
electrolytic cells used in manufacture of
Code 8131
caustic soda and chlorine. Inspects cells to
Title Chemical Products Plant and
ascertain that liquid levels, brine flows,
Machine Operators
cell pressure and current as indicated by
manometers, sight glasses, flowmeters
VOLUME II B 362
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8131.8400 observation and test; drains stuff for
Soap Machine Attendant storage; cleans pan and work place.
Implements safety measures in regard to
operation of plant/machinery and in
Soap Machine Attendant tends automatic
handling and processing materials, oils
machine for cutting, chipping or rolling of
and maintains machinery. May tend open
soap. Sets up machine and tightens steel
or wood fire pan. May be designated
cutting wires on frame. Pushes slab of
according to type of pan or industry
soap directly into machine cradle; starts
associated with.
motor to force wires through slab to cut
individual bars or chip into numerous
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
pieces. May operate hand powered winch
to draw cutting wires through soap slab. Code 8131
Maybe designated as SLABBING Title Chemical Products Plant and
ATTENDANT; MILLING ATTENDANT; Machine Operators
CHIPPING ATTENDANT; PLODDING 8131.8700
ATTENDANT; CUTTING ATTENDANT or Laboratory Attendant
STAMPING MACHINE ATTENDANT
according to nature of duties performed. Laboratory Attendant; Laboratory Bearer
assists Demonstrators and Laboratory
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Assistants in their routine tasks for
Code 8131 purposes of analysis, sampling, dissection,
Title Chemical Products Plant and testing, demonstration etc. as directed.
Machine Operators Receives instructions from Demonstrator
or Laboratory Assistant as appropriate.
8131.8500 Sets apparatus and instruments, gets
Extraction Attendant, Chemical materials ready for dissection, dissolves
salts, prepares standard solutions,
operates simple machines and appliances,
Extraction Attendant; Chemical, Extraction
makes battery connections, etc. according
Operator; Extractor Battery Attendant;
to instruction, nature of work and type of
Kettle Operator; Percolation Attendant;
laboratory in which engaged. May prepare
Acidification Operator boils necessary
chemical reagents and do routine testing
ingredients in kettles, vats, pans, and
and weighing under guidance. May assist
regulates temperature, pressure etc. as
in demonstration of experiments to
directed by Processman, Chemical, to
students.
effect desired chemical reaction. Collects
different ingredients in required
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
proportions and feeds them into pan
separately or together, according to Code 8131
specification, adding required amount of Title Chemical Products Plant and
fluids and other liquids, mixing them by Machine Operators
stirrer. Switches on plant, injecting steam
to boil and mix ingredients; observes 8131.8800
temperature, pressure gauges, timings Agarbati Maker
and other instruments, making
adjustments, where necessary, to ensure Agarbati Maker makes scented agarbatis
process is complete. Collects samples for to give pleasant fragrance when lighted.
VOLUME II B 363
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Collects thin bamboo splints of required grooves on one side and applies glue to
size. Mixes saw dust, gum and coloured grooved side; places leads in grooves of
powder of desired shade in specified glued slat, covers this with other slat and
quantities with water to make thick pulp; presses them together; feeds pressed
adds scent or sandal wood powder to pulp slats into automatic machine which
for desired fragrance and rolls splints with shapes out pencil, applies paint, stamps
required quantity of pulp on wooden maker's name and other identifying data,
plank smeared with thin oil to prevent gives final polish; examines finished
pulp sticking to plank; removes pulp pencils for defects. May be designated
coated splints and dries them in sun; according to type of work performed.
packs dried sticks in convenient packets or
makes them into bundles of desired ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
weight or number with trade labels Code 8131
wrapped for sale. May prepare incense Title Chemical Products Plant and
powders and cubes for burning in religious Machine Operators
ceremonies and other occasions.
8131.9000
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Assembler, Marking Devices (Pen
Code 8131
and Pencil)
Title Chemical Products Plant and
Machine Operators
Assembler, Marking Devices (Pen and
Pencil) performs any combination of
8131.8900
following duties to assemble stencil
Pencil Maker
marking and ink applying devices: Selects
parts according to specifications. Aligns
Pencil Maker performs one or more hand parts following guides, such as contours,
or machine tasks in making of wood- edges, slots, or fastening devices. Joins
encased pencils. Weighs and mixes parts manually or using hand tools, such
material such as graphite, china clay, as wrenches and power screwdrivers, or
chalk, colouring pigment or dyestuff, and positions parts on holding device of
water according to formulae, and passes machine bed under ram, and moves lever
mixture through rollers of grinding or to lower ram, joining parts. Performs
milling machine; places milled graphite or other tasks, such as cleaning parts, using
clay mixture in cylinder of hydraulic air gun; fitting ink chambers; and
extrusion press and starts machine which positioning marker in holder of air
presses mixture through extrusion dies, pressure device that tests marker for leaks
thus forming pencil leads; stores extruded in ink valve and chamber.
leads in drying chambers and cuts dried
leads to pencil lengths, using gauze and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
hand lever knife; packs cut leads in
Code 8131
furnace chambers and treats them with
Title Chemical Products Plant and
controlled heat; impregnates baked leads
Machine Operators
by placing them in container while
suspended and partly submerged in
8131.9900
molten wax or grease; places wood slats
Chemical-Products Machine
into automatic machine which cuts
Operators, Other
VOLUME II B 364
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Chemical Products Machine Operators, finish to prints by heated metal press.
Other include those who operate and May print colour photographs using
monitor machines which produce colour-filters, when processing colour
chemical-based products such as prints, or by other methods such as
linoleum, candles, halogen gases and projection or reproduction process, and
related items not elsewhere classified. be designated as Printer, Colour Film. May
operate contact printing machine to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: produce photographic prints in large
Code 8131 numbers. May be designated as Printer,
Title Chemical Products Plant and Motion Picture Film, if operates film
Machine Operators printing machine to print copies
(positives) of film from picture or sound
Family 8132 negatives in dark room. May be
designated as CHIEF LABORATORIAN if
Photographic Products Machine
directs, controls and co-ordinates work of
Operators
other DEVELOPERS, PRINTERS.
Photographic Products Machine ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Operators operate and monitor
Code 8132
equipment which makes photographic
Title Photographic Products Machine
film and paper, and which processes
Operators
exposed photographic film and makes
prints.
8132.0200
Developer, Photographic
8132.0100
Printer Photographic
Developer, Photographic treats and
develops in dark room exposed films or
Printer, Photographic; Contact Printer photographic plates in series of chemical
prints and develops black and white and water baths for prescribed period to
photographs by contact-printing method prepare transparent black and white
in dark room. Examines negative for negative or positive film. Prepares various
contrast, and selects appropriate developing and fixing solutions in special
photographic printing paper of suitable acid-resistant containers by mixing
grade according to degree of contrast in chemicals with water according to
negative; positions negative and printing formulae; immerses film or plate in
paper in contact printing frame, fastening developer solution for specified period to
down edges; arranges lights to make image visible; times period of
compensate for variations of light and immersion in each bath and maintains
shade in negative; exposes negative and solutions and water at required
paper to light for carefully timed period, temperature; rinses film in water to wash
according to density of negative; off developer solution; places film or plate
unfastens printing frame after exposure into fixing bath to produce transparent
and removes exposed printing paper from and light-constant negative; rinses
frame; develops exposed prints in series negative in cold running water to wash off
of timed chemical and water baths; fixing solution; dries negative by swabbing
washes and dries developed prints, and off excess water with sponge and
trims finished ones. May apply glossy
VOLUME II B 365
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
exposing it to air in dustless location. May Code 8132
prepare transparent positives from Title Photographic Products Machine
negatives. May develop film on automatic Operators
developing machine. May develop
positive or negative film in colour solution 8132.0400
to produce colour film, and be designated Enlarger, Photographic
as DEVELOPER COLOUR FILM. May print
copies from negatives.
Enlarger, Photographic; Projection Printer;
Projection Camera Operator enlarges or
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
reduces photographs to required size with
Code 8132 projection printer in dark room. Sets
Title Photographic Products Machine enlarger (camera) in dark room, placing
Operators plain white board or easel below lens of
enlarger; inserts negative film in holder of
8132.0300 printer (enlarger) and switches on light
Developer, Automatic which shines through negative onto easel
(Photofinishing) below; adjusts various parts of printer and
centres image, to secure desired
projection; determines exposure time and
Developer, Automatic (Photofinishing)
lens opening, and selects appropriate
tends machine that develops sheets,
photographic paper; switches off light and
strips, or continuous roll of film
fixes photographic paper in easel,
preparatory to printing: Pulls film through
switches on light, and exposes paper to
trapdoor into darkroom. Strips paper
light for set period, shading darker areas
backing from film and attaches identifying
of image to produce prints with roughly
label. Feels edges of film to detect tears
equivalent intensity; develops exposed
and repairs film, using stapler. Reads work
prints in series of timed chemical and
order or feels film for size or notches to
water baths; dries and trims finished
determine type of process and developing
prints. May apply glossy finish to prints
time required. Positions racks of film on
with heated metal press. May enlarge or
machine chain links according to
reduce colour film, using appropriate
developing time required through
colour-filter and correcting colour
machine preparatory to processing.
deficiencies of negative with coloured
Activates machine that automatically
filters. May retouch enlarged prints.
transports film through series of chemical
baths to develop, fix, harden, bleach, and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
wash film. Listens for sounds that indicate
machine malfunctioning and notifies Code 8132
supervisor or maintenance personnel Title Photographic Products Machine
when repairs are needed. May run test Operators
strip through machine for inspection by
supervisor and add chemicals to or adjust 8132.0500
machine as directed. May tend equipment Retoucher, Photographic
that develops, fixes image, and dries x-ray
plates. Retoucher, Photographic; Finisher,
Photograph; Artist, Photographic
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: retouches photographic negatives, prints
VOLUME II B 366
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
and enlargements using pencils, brushes 8132.0700
and water colours to increase contrast Printing Machine Operator,
against background. Examines negatives
Photographic
and prints for retouching; places negative
film on retouching desk to obtain
Printing Machine Operator, Photographic
illumination of negative film; fades out
operates automatic film printing machine
spots and blemishes on print or negative,
to print photographs from negative film.
using water colour or pencil; smoothens
Examines negative film for contrast and
contours, eliminates stray hair, blots out
for deciding on type and grade of printing
facial blemishes and wrinkles, softens or
paper to be used; selects appropriate
reinforces highlights and shadows, using
photographic paper; places negative film
fine brush and colour or black pencil;
in film-holder of machine; sets machine
eliminates excess light or shadow in
for light conditions and for time of
negative or print to produce clearer and
exposure; feeds roll of printing paper into
more attractive appearance.
machine; starts machine by operating
switches; observes machine, exposing
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
negative and printing paper to light for
Code 8132
specified time; delivers exposed prints for
Title Photographic Products Machine
developing. Collects exposed prints and
Operators
develops them in chemical baths
(developing and fixing solutions) for
8132.0600
varying but timed periods; washes
Photographic Dark Room developed prints in cold running water;
Operatives dries wet prints under shady conditions.
May fit colour filters for taking colour
Photographic Dark Room Operatives prints. May repair and overhaul printing
perform various routine and low skilled machine.
tasks in photographic dark room or studio,
such as developing, printing and enlarging ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
photographs; setting up camera and Code 8132
arranging back-ground screen, furniture, Title Photographic Products Machine
etc.; preparing developing solution in Operators
prescribed manner; cleaning prints or
negatives in water; drying negatives and
prints and cutting them to sizes, mounting 8132.0800
prints, etc.; assisting operator in operating Film Developing Machine Operator
automatic printing, developing or
enlarging machine; and may be
Film Developing Machine Operator;
designated as Processor, Print Cutter,
Developer, Films operates film developing
Print Mounter etc.
machine and develops exposed film in
series of chemical and water baths in dark
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
room, dries film in automatic drying unit,
Code 8132 and prepares transparent black and white
Title Photographic Products Machine negative or positive film. Receives
Operators exposed film and notes instructions
regarding nature of exposure and
VOLUME II B 367
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
developing conditions to be followed; temperature to produce emulsion of
loads exposed film roll in magazine of required viscosity and adding further
developing machine; mixes, or supervises chemicals according to type of coating
mixing of, developing chemical baths in required. Operates coating machine,
prescribed proportions; gets tanks of feeding film or paper base material into
machine filled to prescribed level with machine, which moves it on rollers
chemical solution and water, as required; through liquid emulsion, over chill roll or
regulates and maintains correct into cooling chamber to set emulsion, and
temperature of developing solution; slowly through drying tunnel supplied
draws end of film from magazine and with warm filtered air. Operates rotary
feeds it through feed roller of machine. slitting machine which slits film or paper
Starts machine, observes and regulates into narrow width and automatically re-
running of film roll, drawn over rollers, reels each width. May be designated
and passing through series of guides, according to type of work performed.
immersed in developing solution and
fixing baths; adjusts speed of machine and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
runs it for set period until developed film, Code 8132
emerging from chemical bath tank, is Title Photographic Products Machine
rinsed while passing through cold water Operators
tank to wash off fixing solution. Maintains
temperature of drying chamber at 8132.1000
continuously set level, and dries negative;
Linoleum Maker
winds developed and dried film
automatically on reels. Supervises
Linoleum Maker performs one or more
cleaning of water and chemical tanks
tasks in making of linoleum. Mixes
periodically and ensures re-filling of tanks
materials such as oil, rosin and ground
with fresh chemical solutions. May
cork in mixing machine to produce
develop and prepare coloured film.
linoleum cement. Operates calender
machine which spreads linoleum cement
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
on burlap or hessian. Stores coated cloth
Code 8132
in heated rooms where it is left for several
Title Photographic Products Machine
days to dry and harden. Operates rotary
Operators
machine which prints patterns on
linoleum by means of engraved or cut
8132.0900
hollow rollers fed with various oil colours.
Photographic Film and Paper Passes linoleum through machine which
Maker trims edges and cuts it off to desired
length. Examines finished linoleum for
Photographic Film and Paper Maker defects. May be designated according to
performs one or more hand or machine tasks performed.
tasks in making of photographic film and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
paper. Mixes gelatine, water and Code 8132
chemicals in kettle, heats for prescribed Title Photographic Products Machine
period and allows mixture to cool, to form Operators
emulsion jelly. Melts and ripens emulsion
jelly prior to coating, controlling 8132.9900
VOLUME II B 368
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Photographic Products Machine Rubber Products Machine Operators
Operators, other operate and monitor machines which
knead and blend rubber and rubber
compounds, and produce various
Photographic Products Machine
components and products from natural
Operators, Other include workers who
and synthetic rubber, such as moulded
operate and monitor equipment which
footwear, domestic articles, insulating
makes photographic film and paper, and
materials, industrial accessories, or tyres.
which processes exposed photographic
film and make prints not elsewhere
classified. 8141.0100
Calender Machine Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8132 Calender Machine Operator, Rubber
Title Photographic Products Machine operates calendering machine to convert
Operators rubber into rubber sheets by rolling
process. Adjusts steam valves to regulate
Group 814 heat of machine rollers, judging heat by
touch and by observing reaction of
Rubber, Plastic and Paper Products rubber; sets thickness gauge by turning
hand-wheels; starts machine, feeds it with
Machine Operators
chunks of rubber; tests thickness of
product with gauge and, if necessary,
Rubber, Plastic and Paper Products
makes suitable adjustments; supervises
Machine Operators operate and monitor
helpers who load and unload material
machines which knead and blend rubber
from machine. May attend to running
and rubber compounds, and produce
repairs. May work as Calenderer,
various components and products from
Rubberised Fabric.
natural and synthetic rubber and plastics
or produce different paper products from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
paper, paperboard, cardboard and similar
Code 8141
materials.
Title Rubber Products Machine
Operators
Occupations in this Group are classified
into the following Families:
8141.0101
Pre and Post Calendering Operator
8141 Rubber Products Machine
Operators
Pre and Post Calendering Operator is
8142 Plastic Products Machine
responsible for feeding the correct
Operators
quantity of compound to the Calender
8143 Paper Products Machine Operators
rolls.
Family 8141
Qualification Pack Details:
Rubber Products Machine
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q0729
Operators QP NOS Name Pre and Post
Calendering
Operator
VOLUME II B 369
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
NSQF Level 4 shaped strip. Selects die and fits it to
machine; turns steam valve to heat die to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: required temperature; starts machine;
Code 8141 adjusts machine for specified extrusion
Title Rubber Products Machine speed by means of gear lever or any other
Operators device and fixes proper-size dies to
machine to get specified profile; adjusts
8141.0200 centring screws in case of tubes, to get
uniform wall thickness; feeds rubber stock
Cord Dipping Operator
into machine by hand or conveyor;
verifies dimensions of extruded rubber
Cord Dipping Operator operates a
with gauge, callipers and rubber; adjusts
machine to prepare rubberised fabric by
controls to synchronize speed of conveyor
passing fabric through solution of latex
belt with speed of extrusion of rubber.
and other chemicals and dries it over
May be designated according to product
preheated drums. Places roll of material
extruded as Inner-tube Tuber-machine
on machine feeder; threads end of roll
Operator (Rubber tyre and tube), Hose
through machine rollers and affixes it to
Tuber Machine Operator (Rubber goods).
winder at finishing end; ensures that
chamber of machine is filled with required
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
quantity of latex solution, chemicals etc.,
Code 8141
for treatment of fabric; starts machine
Title Rubber Products Machine
and adjusts tension of fabric and pressure
Operators
of rollers; regulates temperature of drying
drum; observes coating of fabric on one or
8141.0301
both sides with rubber solution and then
after threading over preheated drums for Feed Extruder Operator
drying; tests thickness of product with a
gauze and makes necessary adjustments; Feed Extruder Operator is responsible for
removes solution coated dried roll of feeding the rubber compound to the
fabric from winder; supervises helpers extruder and performing the extrusion
who load and unload material from operation using the extruder
machine. Oils and lubricates machine.
May operate calendering machine. Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q0623
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: QP NOS Name Feed Extruder
Code 8141 Operator
Title Rubber Products Machine NSQF Level 4
Operators
8141.0300 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Extruding Machine Operator Code 8141
(Rubber) Title Rubber Products Machine
Operators
Extruding Machine Operator (Rubber)
8141.0302
operates a machine in which compounded
rubber is extruded through heated die Tube Extruder Operator
fixed to machine head to form continuous
VOLUME II B 370
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Tube Extruder Operator is responsible for Slitting Machine Operator (Cycle
feeding the rubber compound to the Tyre)
extruder and performing the extrusion
operation using the Extruder.
Slitting Machine Operator, Cycle Tyre;
Fabric Tearing Machine Operator, Cycle
Qualification Pack Details:
Tyre cuts rolls of rubberised fabric to
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0625 required widths over slitting or tearing
QP NOS Name Tube Extruder machine. Mounts roll of rubber coated
Operator fabric to machine shaft using hoisting
NSQF Level 4 equipment; adjusts rotary knives to cut
stock to desired widths using a wrench;
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: threads end of roll of stock through guides
Code 8141 of machine with aid of helper; adjusts
Title Rubber Products Machine guide rolls to give proper tension to fabric
Operators roll; starts slitting machine, catches end of
cut strips and starts them on power driven
8141.0400 shells or spools. In operating Tear off
Rubber Fabric Cutting Machine Machine, tears by hand required width of
fabric from end of roll, passes each end
Operator
over opposite rolls (top batch and bottom
batch) so that fabric is automatically torn
Rubber Fabric-Cutting Machine Operator;
off and wound in separate rolls by
Fabric Cutter, Rubber cuts strips of
rotation of rollers in opposite direction;
rubberised fabric on bias for use in
observes machine cutting and winding cut
building up plies of pneumatic tyres to
strips and regulates tension of winding
give added strength and flexibility to
device by turning wheels; lifts off rolls of
tyres. With aid of helper, lifts roll of
cut stock. Oils and lubricates machine.
canvas lined, rubberised fabric on rack of
machine; passes end of fabric over guide
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
rolls and on cutting table; adjusts tension
Code 8141
of fabric over guide rolls. Measures with
Title Rubber Products Machine
rule and sets cutter at desired points;
Operators
starts machine, adjusts speed of feed and
cutting action and removes and counts
8141.0600
strips; checks fabric pieces periodically to
determine conformity to specifications Bead Maker (Rubber Tyre)
and makes necessary adjustments to
machine; oils machine bearings; sharpens Bead Maker, Rubber Tyre; Beading
circular knife, using abrasive stone. May Machine Operator; Bead Builder builds up
operate slitting machine. rubber-covered wire portions of beads in
bead forming machine. Selects desired
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: size form and mounts it on power driven
Code 8141 shaft with wrench; places end of single
Title Rubber Products Machine strand of rubber-covered wire under small
Operators clamp on form; steps on control pedal and
allows form to revolve until specified
8141.0500 number of wire strands have been laid in
VOLUME II B 371
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
groove of form; cuts wire with wire- 8141.0711
cutting pliers, removes formed wires, and Continuous Curing Operator
wraps small piece of rubber taps around
ring to hold loose ends. May perform one
Continuous Curing Operator feeds the
or other of above operations and be
rubber compound into the machine to
designated accordingly as BEAD CUTTER,
ensure a greater consistency of the profile
BEAD WELDER, BEAD GRINDER, BEAD
of the end product.
NIPPER, BEAD SOLDERER, and BEAD
WRAPPER. May cover beads with
Qualification Pack Details:
rubberised fabric. May oil and lubricate
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0208
machine parts.
QP NOS Name Continuous Curing
Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
NSQF Level 4
Code 8141
Title Rubber Products Machine
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Operators
Code 8141
Title Rubber Products Machine
8141.0700
Operators
Profiling Operator (Cycle Tyre)
8141.0712
Profiling Operator, (Cycle Tyre) warms Roto Curing Operator
rubber compound between mill rollers
and passes it through profile bowls for
Roto Curing Operator is responsible for
giving shape to cycle tyre tread rubber.
loading the pre-fabricated “green”
Adjusts steam valves to regulate heat of
product, to be cured, appropriately on to
profiling machine rollers, judging heat by
the machine.
touch and observing reaction of rubber;
turns hand wheels to adjust distance
Qualification Pack Details:
between rolls; inserts chunks of
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0209
compounded rubber between rolls to feed
QP NOS Name Roto Curing
machine or positions conveyor feeder in
Operator
front of rolls that carry strip of rubber
NSQF Level 4
from warm up mill for continuous feeding;
starts machine, observes material
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
threading between mill rollers on to
Code 8141
profile bowl and take off conveyor;
Title Rubber Products Machine
adjusts knives to cut material to specified
Operators
length; tests thickness of product with
gauze and makes necessary adjustments;
8141.0713
removes cut pieces and examines for
defects. Injection Moulding Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Injection Moulding Operator is
Code 8141 responsible for feeding the rubber
Title Rubber Products Machine compound/strip into the Injection
Operators
VOLUME II B 372
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
moulding machine for making rubber QP NOS Name Internal Mixer
parts Operator
NSQF Level 4
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0207 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Name Injection Moulding Code 8141
Operator Title Rubber Products Machine
NSQF Level 4 Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 8141.0716
Code 8141 Kneader Operator
Title Rubber Products Machine
Operators Kneader is responsible for mixing raw
materials in the Kneader and feed the
8141.0714 Rubber into the machine to prepare the
Transfer Moulding Operator rubber compound.
Transfer Moulding Operator is responsible Qualification Pack Details:
for operating the machine and feed the QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0103
rubber compound and other materials QP NOS Name Kneader Operator
into the machine for making rubber parts. NSQF Level 4
Qualification Pack Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0206 Code 8141
QP NOS Name Transfer Moulding Title Rubber Products Machine
Operator Operators
NSQF Level 4
8141.0800
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Finishing Operator (Rubber Tyre)
Code 8141
Title Rubber Products Machine Finishing Operator, Rubber Tyres; Tyre
Operators Finisher cleans and paints tyres, tests for
balance and conductivity of tread on
8141.0715 testing machine. Mounts tyres on rotating
Internal Mixer Operator spindle; revolves spindle and examines
visually for side wall cracks, foreign
material and blisters; feels beads to detect
Internal Mixer Operator is responsible for
kinks and feels inner surface of tyre to
mixing the raw materials in the internal
detect spread cords, ply separations or
mixing machine to prepare a rubber
buckles; trims toe of bead and mould
compound which is processed further to
over-flow with knife; removes tyre and
obtain final compounds
positions it on balance table to check
conformance to balance specification;
Qualification Pack Details:
releases lock that permits balance table to
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0201
float freely on mounting and bubble
gauge to function; observes bubble gauge
VOLUME II B 373
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
to determine if tyre balance is within 8141.1000
specified limits; marks tyre where gauge Finishing Operator (Rubber Tube)
indicates lightest area, for location of
inner tube valve; marks defective tyres
Finishing Operator, Rubber Tubes
and affixes labels to acceptable ones.
examines cured rubber inner tubes for
defects, such as cracks, blisters and thin
spots. Inflates inner tube to facilitate
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
inspection, using air hose; examines tube
Code 8141 for defects, specified brand and valve
Title Rubber Products Machine while revolving on turn table; marks
Operators defective tubes and places them in
storage area for removal to repair section;
8141.0900 installs cores and lock nuts in valve stems
Sealing and Valve Fitting Operator of acceptable tubes, using electric screw
driver; inserts valve stem into fixture and
Sealing and Valve Fitting Operator, Tube pulls lever to bend valve.
and Tyre Building punches holes in inner
tubes for valve stems by machine, inserts ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
valve stem from inside of tube into hole, Code 8141
cuts tube to length and seals cut edges in Title Rubber Products Machine
press. Places one end of tube over arm Operators
like table of machine; presses pedal
forcing punch through tube; removes tube 8141.1100
from machine, inserts valve stem from Sheet Maker (Rubber)
inside of tube into hole, slips washer over
outer end of valve stem and turns locknut
Sheet Maker, Rubber, Smokehouse Man
on stem with wrenches; assembles oval
prepares rubber sheets from tapped
shaped rubber and rubberised pieces to
rubber milk and smokes them to required
build up pad placed over section of inner
colour and transparency. Collects tapped
tube where valve stem is placed, following
rubber milk, progressively sieves it, using
plant specifications; cuts tube to specified
different sieves; coagulates it using acids;
length, bevels edges at each end to
washes with water letting it drip dry in air;
prepare them for splicing in power driven
rolls it into sheets using mechanical or
rotary knife that automatically cuts bevel;
manually operated rollers. Collects rolled
brushes rubber cement or acid on each
rubber sheets, spreads them evenly on
end of tube (inside skived edge has been
racks in smokehouse; treats rolled sheets
turned back over tube to expose splice);
with hot smoke over prescribed
joins stock together to form tube by
temperature in closed smokehouse,
lapping and bonding edges with hand
changing position of sheets from place to
roller or press. Removes tube for curing.
place in the smokehouse, removing the
rolled sheets after smoking for specified
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
period till sheets have acquired correct
Code 8141 colour and transparency.
Title Rubber Products Machine
Operators ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8141
VOLUME II B 374
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Title Rubber Products Machine rubber to give rubber coating on surface
Operators of fabrics. Adjusts steam valves to
regulate heat of machine rollers; charges
8141.1201 fabric to be rubber-coated between
Moulder (Rubber)/Compression rollers; sews ends of cloth rolls together
and threads fabric through rollers to form
Moulding Operator
continuous sheet; inspects sheet to detect
turned edges, material defects;
Moulder, Rubber; Rubber-Moulding Press
smoothens wrinkles and repairs holes,
Operator; Compression Moulding
faulty seams, or frayed edges; starts
Operator moulds rubber in a steam or
machine and feeds it with chunks of
electrically heated press to form various
rubber; tests with gauge thickness of
products, such as gaskets, doll parts, and
rubberised fabric and makes necessary
shoe heels. Places uncured rubber
adjustments; examines thickness of
between upper and lower dies of mould;
coated sheets. May work as Calender
inserts mould in press; turns valve to
Machine Operator, Rubber.
lower ram on mould and to apply pressure
and steam heat simultaneously for a
Qualification Pack Details:
specified time; removes mould from
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0728
press, opens die and removes formed
QP NOS Name Operator-Textile
pieces with tongs or by hand; hangs
Coating
formed articles on racks. May operate
NSQF Level 4
press in which rubber is injected into
moulds. May be designated according to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
articles pressed, as RUBBER HEEL AND
SOLE PRESSMAN. Code 8141
Title Rubber Products Machine
Qualification Pack Details: Operators
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0205
8141.1400
QP NOS Name Compression
Moulding Operator Hose Maker (Rubber Goods)
NSQF Level 4
Hose Maker (Rubber Goods) makes
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: rubber hoses by wrapping plies (layers) of
Code 8141 rubberised fabric and gum rubber stock
Title Rubber Products Machine on rubber tubes by means of wrapping
Operators machine and vulcanising pan. Places
mandrel and pre-cut rubber tubing on
8141.1301 workbench; swabs mandrel with soap
stone solution and pushes it into rubber
Calenderer Rubberised
tubing; adjusts guides on machine to
Fabric/Operator-Textile Coating
accommodate ply stock of specified
width; positions mandrel on machine
Calenderer, Rubberised Fabric Operator- rollers and swabs rubber tubing on
Textile Coating warms rubber compound mandrel with rubber cement to provide
between mill rollers, passes fabric adhesive surface; positions pre-cut ply
between calender rollers, feeding with stock between guides and depresses
VOLUME II B 375
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
pedal to wind and roll ply stock around Title Rubber Products Machine
rubber tubing; cements band on hose in Operators
specified location; examines hose for
wrinkles and loose plies, smoothens 8141.1600
wrinkles and presses plies together, using Latex Foam Cushion Maker
fingers and roller; measures dimensions of
hose with rule, callipers, and gauges, and
Latex Foam Cushion Maker moulds foam
cuts off excess rubber with knife; trims
rubber products such as cushions,
and cements tubing to seal raw ends of
mattresses from latex by reducing its
ply stock; wraps fabric around hose to
ammonia content, mixing and stirring it
prepare hose for curing. May wind wire
with chemicals and pouring and settling
between plies for reinforcement of hose.
mixture in required mould in vulcanising
May clamp or cement metal fittings to
tank. Pumps latex into tank of machine;
ends of hose using rubber cement and
turns valve to heat steam jacket of tank to
hand tools. May wind rope around hose,
specified temperature and observes
on corrugated mandrel to hold hose
gauge; sets timer and starts machine
against contours of mandrel during cure.
agitators that induce evaporation of
ammonia; turns valves to regulate flow of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
treated latex and air into frothing tank to
Code 8141 mix air with latex; determines density of
Title Rubber Products Machine latex mixture by weighing out specified
Operators quantity of mixed latex from frothing tank
into holding tanks; weighs and pours
8141.1500 specified amount of latex and chemicals in
Latex Worker mixing machine and starts machine that
mixes ingredients; places mould under
Latex Worker tends machine that dips discharge spout of mixing machine and
forms into tanks of liquid latex to produce fills mould with mixture; cures filled
rubber goods, such as gloves, balloons, moulds by hydraulic press to form
teats, valve tubes, and finger tips. Lifts products; removes product from mould,
form board from conveyor and fastens it squeezes out water by rolling process and
to machine bed with hinge clamps and finally dries it on spreading machine or
slide bolts; inverts bed by hand and moves drying chamber. May mix ground rubber
lever to submerge forms in tank of latex particles with latex, using mixing machine
solution according to specifications; raises and fills moulds with mixture.
and rocks bed to create movement that
dries coagulant or equally distributes and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sets latex on forms; lifts boards and Code 8141
applies carbowax on latex coated mould Title Rubber Products Machine
and carefully removes mould from latex Operators
coating by hand; adds solutions to tanks
with dipper to speed drying time or 8141.1701
replenish supply of specified level. Tyre Builder/Radial Building
Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8141
VOLUME II B 376
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Tyre Builder; Tyre Maker; Radial Building Qualification Pack Details:
Operator sets up and operates drum-type QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0521
machine to build up pneumatic tyres. QP NOS Name Tyre Building
Positions ply stitcher rollers and drum Operator-
according to width of stock, using hand Commercial
tools and gauges; rubs cement stick on Vehicles
drum edge to provide adhesive surface for NSQF Level 4
plies; pulls plies from machine spool and
aligns with edge of drum; depresses pedal ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to rotate drum, winds specified length of
Code 8141
ply on to drum, tears ply from spool, and
Title Rubber Products Machine
splices ends; brushes solvent on to ply to
Operators
ensure adhesion and repeats process as
specified; alternating direction of each ply
8141.1703
to strengthen tyre; pushes switch to move
Tyre Building Operator-Passenger
bead setters that press prefabricated
Vehicles
bends on to plies and to position rollers
that turn edges of plies under and over
beads; winds chafers and breaker on to Tyre Building Operator-Passenger Vehicles
plies; aligns tread with guide, starts drum is responsible for building the 2/3/4
to wind tread on to plies; and splices wheeler passenger vehicle tyres.
depresses pedal to collapse drum and lifts
tyre. May turn ends of plies under and Qualification Pack Details:
over beads with steel rod and place it to QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0519
one side in readiness for moulding and QP NOS Name Tyre Building
vulcanising (curing). Operator-Passenger
Vehicles
Qualification Pack Details: NSQF Level 4
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0520
QP NOS Name Radial Building ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Operator Code 8141
NSQF Level 4 Title Rubber Products Machine
Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8141 8141.1800
Title Rubber Products Machine Tyre Moulder
Operators
Tyre Moulder shapes unfinished, new or
8141.1702 reconditioned, pneumatic tyres in press
Tyre Building Operator-Commercial mould. Places air or water bag of specified
Vehicles size inside unfinished tyre using tire
spreading device and clamps, clamps tyre
into mould; inflates bag with air or hot
Tyre Building Operator–Commercial
water under pressure to force tyre to
Vehicles is responsible for building the
shape of mould; places mould in
2/3/4 wheeler commercial vehicle tyres.
vulcanising oven, regulates pressure and
VOLUME II B 377
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
steam heat to vulcanise tyre; removes specified number of plies are formed into
tyre from mould when vulcanising is band; depresses pedal or pulls lever to
complete and extracts air or water bag. move rollers against band and rotates
May be designated according to the type drum to band plies; pushes pedal to
of tyre moulded such as TYRE MOULDER collapse drum and pulls band from drum.
CYCLE; TYRE MOULDER, AUTOMOBILE; May roll gum stock between plies and cut
TYRE MOULDER TRUCK. with shears. May wrap canvas liners
around bands to present adhering during
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: storage. May measure ply stock with table
Code 8141 marker and tear stock on bias to specified
Title Rubber Products Machine length to form banding strips.
Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8141.1801 Code 8141
Tyre Moulding Operator Title Rubber Products Machine
Operators
Tyre Moulding Operator is responsible for
8141.2000
operating the press, load the “green” tyre
in the mould and remove the cured tyre Trimmer (Tyre Building)
from the machine.
Trimmer, Tyre Building; Tyre Trimmer,
Qualification Pack Details: Hand trims excess rubber formed on tyres
QP NOS Reference RSC/Q 0211 during curing process. Places tyre on turn
QP NOS Name Tyre Moulding table or machine driven rollers; holds
Operator knife at angle to tyre to avoid cutting tyre
NSQF Level 4 and turns table manually or mechanically
to cut excess rubber; lifts tyre from table
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: or pulls lever to remove it from rollers.
May trim motor, "giant", aero, cycle tyres,
Code 8141
etc. May inspect finished tyres for defects
Title Rubber Products Machine
and marks them with chalk for
Operators
rectification or rejection.
8141.1900
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Band Builder (Tyre Building)
Code 8141
Title Rubber Products Machine
Band Builder, Tyre Building; Pocket
Operators
Maker; Ply Bander; Tyre Bander operates
machine to glue together bands of ply
8141.2100
stock for use in manufacture of rubber
Tyre Repairer
tyres. Positions play stock on drum and
aligns with sides of drum; depresses pedal
to rotate drum while guiding ply on drum Tyre Repairer; Tyre Repairman repairs or
to form band; swabs wrinkles with benzol remedies defects in cured tyres by
and smooths by hand; splices ends of plies retreading, vulcanising or other processes.
by pressing with fingers; repeats Examines and probes tyre with awl (a
operation, reversing angle of splice until small pointed tool for making holes) to
VOLUME II B 378
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
determine extent of defect; buffs watches gauges and makes necessary
blemishes from tyre, using portable adjustments to ensure that correct
buffer; cuts out rubber around cracks and vulcanising conditions are maintained;
buffs area to prepare it for patching; pulls moulds when vulcanising is
cements gum rubber patch to cut-out to complete; removes cured tubes from
build up defective area; rolls down patch moulds and places them on hook
with hand stitcher and punctures air provided.
pockets in patch to remove trapped air;
buffs and trims excess rubber from tyre; ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
replaces treads by cutting defective tread Code 8141
from plies, buffing ply surface, and Title Rubber Products Machine
cementing new tread on plies. May tend Operators
vulcanizing machine to cure patch on tyre
for specified time. May be known as 8141.2300
RETREADER, TYRE, if engaged in tyre
Cycle Tube Reverser
retreading.
Cycle Tube Reverser reverses cycle tubes
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
by pneumatic system for grinding. Carries
Code 8141
mandrels (a rod used to retain the cavity
Title Rubber Products Machine
in rubber tube) with vulcanised tubes to
Operators
reversing stand; inserts one end of the
mandrel into the air chamber tube on
8141.2200
stand; starts compressor to permit air into
Moulder, Rubber Tube air-chamber tube; pulls by hand one end
of rubber tube on mandrel into air-
Moulder, Rubber Tube inflates joined raw chamber tube; closes other end of
inner tube with air, fits it in press mould mandrel by hand and pulls out mandrel by
and heats tube and mould to required hand to separate tube from mandrel in
temperature by means of steam for reverse position; removes reversed tubes
vulcanisation. Selects suitable shaping rim to joining section.
to correspond to mould in press; sets built
tube in rim with its valve stem fitted in ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
slot of rim; inflates tube with air hose to Code 8141
bring it to its normal shape; caps valve Title Rubber Products Machine
stem to hold air in tube; removes tube Operators
from shaping rim, places it inside mould;
removes valve cap, connects hand grip to 8141.2400
valve stem, and injects air in tube by
Rubber Stamp Maker
pressing foot pedal to hold tube firmly
inside mould; checks curing pot (oven) to
Rubber-Stamp Maker makes rubber
ensure that covers and all connections are
stamps on order and mounts them for
in place; operates hydraulic ram inside pot
use. Composes metal type to match copy;
so that moulds containing inner tube are
locks type in chase and mounts chase on
held firmly in place; starts clock to time
bed of vulcaniser; mixes French chalk,
period of vulcanising and controls
china clay, Plaster of Paris, dextrin and
temperature and flow of steam into pot;
water and places mixture in metal
VOLUME II B 379
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
moulding plate; reverses moulding plate Tablet Machine Operator, Tabletting
over chase to receive type impression; Operator (Plastics) tends tablet-machine
dries compound in oven; covers moulded that compresses plastics powders into
impression with cut to size piece of pellets or biscuits of specified weight and
uncured rubber; clamps rubber-covered shape for use in moulding plastics
mould under steam chamber of vulcaniser products. Sets appropriate punch on
until rubber is cured; removes cured cylinder and die on die setting plate; feeds
rubber from mould, trims away excess hopper of machine with desired blend of
rubber, and mounts stamp on wooden or plastics powders; opens gate valve to
metal backing with rubber cement. control flow of powders from hopper into
machine. Turns steam valve to regulate
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: temperature of machine according to
Code 8141 ammeter gauge, and adjusts die pressure
Title Rubber Products Machine to attain specified hardness of pill.
Operators Examines compressed tablets to ensure
that they are of required weight, size and
8141.9900 shape. May clean, change and adjust die.
May operate mixing, sieving or milling
Rubber and Rubberised Product
machine. May be designated, according to
Makers, Other
type of machine used, as ROTARY
PERFORMER; SINGLE STROKER
Rubber and Rubberised Product Makers,
PERFORMER.
Other include all other workers engaged
in making different types of rubber and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
rubberised products, not elsewhere
Code 8142
classified.
Title Plastic Products Machine
Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8141
8142.0200
Title Rubber Products Machine
Laminating Press Operator (Plastic)
Operators
Family 8142 Laminating Press Operator (Plastics) sets
and operates laminating press to heat and
press plastics or plastics impregnated
Plastic Products Machine Operators
material into solid laminated sheets.
Selects metal plates according to finish
Plastic Products Machine Operators
desired. Weighs and assembles sheets of
operate and monitor machines which
impregnated material and places
knead and blend compounds to obtain
assemblies between metal planishing
plastic materials and which make various
plates; slides plates into platens of
plastic components and articles.
hydraulic press; moves controls to heat
press to specified temperature and
8142.0100
compress assemblies between plates;
Tablet Machine Operator removes plates from platens after
specified time and strips plastics sheets
from metal plates, using knife; examines
VOLUME II B 380
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
sheets for defects. Cleans metal plates, Extruding Machine Operator
using cloth, solvents, or scrapers or by (Plastic)
dipping plates into vats of hot water,
using chain hoist. May adjust heat and
Extruding Machine Operator (Plastics)
pressure controls.
operates machine to extrude
thermoplastic materials to form tubes,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
rods and film, according to specifications.
Code 8142 Weighs and mixes pelletized, granular, or
Title Plastic Products Machine powdered thermoplastic materials and
Operators colouring pigments in tumbling machine
set by Extruding Machine Setter (Plastics)
8142.0300 couples hose to die holder to circulate
Extruding Machine Setter (Plastic) steam, water, air or oil to die; fills
machine hopper with mixed materials or
Extruding Machine Setter (Plastics) sets stuffs rolls of plastic dough into machine
and adjusts die and extrusion machine to cylinders; starts machine and synchronizes
form dry or dough-like plastics into speed of conveyor belt with speed of
continuous rod, tube, strip or similar extrusion through die; examines extruded
shape of desired dimensions. Installs dies, product for defects, such as wrinkles,
machine screws and sizing rings, using bubbles and splits; measures extruded
hand tools; couples hose to die holder to articles for conformance to specifications,
circulate steam, water, air or oil to die; using micrometres, callipers and gauges
fills machine hopper with materials, using and adjusts speed and weight, controls or
conveyor auger or stuffs rolls of plastic turns hot and cold water, air, oil or steam
dough into machine cylinders; starts valves to obtain product of specified
machine and sets controls to regulate dimensions. May reel extruded product
vacuum, air pressure, sizing rings and into rolls of specified length and weight.
temperature and synchronizes speed of May oil and clean machine.
extrusion with pulling rolls; examines
extruded sample product for defects, such ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
as wrinkles, bubbles and splits. Measures Code 8142
extruded articles for conformance to Title Plastic Products Machine
specifications using micrometres, callipers Operators
and gauges and makes adjustments by
regulating speed and weight controls or 8142.0501
manipulating hot and cold water, air, oil Injection Moulding Machine
or steam valves and observing gauges so
Operator (Plastic)
as to obtain forms of specified
dimensions.
Injection Moulding Machine Operator
(Plastics) sets up and operates injection-
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
moulding machines to cast products from
Code 8142
thermoplastic materials. Installs dies on
Title Plastic Products Machine
machine, according to work order
Operators
specifications, using clamps, bolts, and
hand-tools; sets thermostatic controls to
8142.0400
obtain specified moulding temperature;
VOLUME II B 381
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
dumps pre-mixed plastic powders or The Encapsulation Operator is responsible
pellets into hopper and starts machine; for providing cover to the lead frame or
pulls lever to close dies and inject into assembled LED by filling with epoxy. The
dies to cast part; removes finished individual at work operates the moulding
product from dies, using hand tools and press for active components or manually
trims excess material from part using fills epoxy in the reflector-cum-PCB of LED
knife. May mix thermoplastic materials and processes to complete the
and colouring pigments in mixing encapsulation.
machine, according to formulae. May
grind scrap plastic into powders for reuse. Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q1703
Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Name Encapsulation
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3501 Operator
QP NOS Name Injection Moulding NSQF Level 4
Machine Operator
NSQF Level 4 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8142
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Plastic Products Machine
Code 8142 Operators
Title Plastic Products Machine
Operators 8142.0600
Compression Moulding Machine
8142.0502
Operator (Plastic)
Moulding Operator
Compression Moulding Machine Operator
Moulding Operator is a skilled operator (Plastics) sets up and operates
capable to operate PU pouring machines compression moulding machines to mould
and Injection moulding machine used in plastics products by heat and pressure
lasting process and also skilful to perform according to specifications. Installs dies on
basic supervisory tasks to monitor the press, using clamps, bolts, and hand tools
performance of the workers. and coats dies with parting agents; sets
thermostat to regulate temperature of
Qualification Pack Details: dies; weighs premixed plastic compound
QP NOS Reference LSS/N9101 and pours compound into die well, or
QP NOS Name Moulding Operator spreads fabric on die and dumps
NSQF Level 4 compound over fabric; pulls lever to lower
hydraulic ram that compresses compound
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: between dies to form and cure part;
Code 8142 removes cured part from mould, using
Title Plastic Products Machine hand tools and air hose. May mix catalysts
Operators and colouring pigments with plastic
compound, using paddle and mixing
8142.0503 machine. May operate compression
moulding machines to form product under
Encapsulation Operator
pressure only and be designated COLD-
MOULDING-PRESS OPERATOR.
VOLUME II B 382
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: thermoplastic sheets into products, such
Code 8142 as automobile pillar posts, nose pieces,
Title Plastic Products Machine rear quarter-panel covers, and toys.
Operators Places plastics sheet on top of mould,
positions sealing frame around sheet, and
8142.0700 fastens frame to rim of mould with
clamps. Pushes button to start machine
Bottle Blowing Machine Operator
that heats sheet, draws it into mould to
(Plastic)
form product, and sprays product with
cold water or air to harden it. Removes
Bottle Blowing Machine Operator
product from mould and reloads
(Plastics) feeds thermo-plastics material
thermoplastic sheet into machine. May
into hopper and operates buttons and
trim excessive moulding material from
levers of bottle blowing machine to
products, using knife, scissors, or band
extrude tube like material and pumps air
saw. May set up machine to form
to shape it into form of mould. Weighs
products.
and mixes pelletized, granular, or
powdered thermoplastic materials and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
colouring pigments in tumbling machine
Code 8142
according to formula; installs dies,
Title Plastic Products Machine
machine screws, sizing rings, using hand-
Operators
tools; and couples hose to die holder to
circulate steam, water, air or oil to die;
8142.0900
fills machine hopper with mixed materials
Embossing Machine Setter (Plastic)
or stuffs rolls of plastic dough into
machine cylinders; starts machine and
sets controls to regulate vacuum, air Embossing Machine Setter (Plastics) sets
pressure, sizing rings and temperature; up embossing machine that stamps and
depresses lever of machine and ensures embosses design on plastic sheets. Installs
that parison tube reaches entire length of and locks embossed plate in chase and
mould or die; cuts ends of tube with locks chase in bed of press. Lays piece of
scissors near nozzle and blows air into card board on machine bed under plate
mould by operating pump; opens moulds and impresses it with plate. Cuts out
and removes finished article. Repeats impression and glues it to bed under plate
process. adjusting table in order that impression
and plate are in exact alignment; sets
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: guides to hold plastics sheet in position
under plate and adjusts table height to
Code 8142
impart correct depth of impression. Starts
Title Plastic Products Machine
machine and places sample piece of
Operators
plastics sheet in guides and pushes it
under embossing plate. Inspects
8142.0800
embossing on sample for correct depth of
Vacuum Plastic Forming Machine
identification and correct faults as
Operator
necessary.
Vacuum Plastic Forming Machine ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Operator tends machine that moulds
VOLUME II B 383
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Code 8142 temperature of drying box, examines
Title Plastic Products Machine printed sheet to detect defects, such as
Operators wrinkles, tears, smeared printing, and
uneven colour distribution, cleans and oils
8142.1000 press, and repairs or replaces broken or
Embossing Machine Operator worn parts of press, using hand tools. May
set print on printing cylinder and blend
(Plastic)
coloured inks, according to job order.
Embossing Machine Operator (Plastics)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
feeds and operates embossing machine to
Code 8142
stamp and emboss designs on plastics
Title Plastic Products Machine
sheets. Installs engraved embossing roller,
Operators
pressure roller and roll of plastics sheets
to be embossed in machine by hand or
8142.1200
using hoist; manipulates lever or clutch to
regulate pressure between rollers; Button Maker
threads plastics sheet through machine
and regulates flow of steam into rollers to Button Maker performs one or more hand
counteract curling of sheet and to obtain or machine tasks in making of buttons.
desired depth of embossing or surface Cuts button blanks from various materials
shine to sheet; starts machine, examines such as composition or vegetable
embossed sheet and makes adjustments material, ivory or pearl by hand or with
to secure desired results; adjusts rotary automatic cutting machine; removes
cutting device to cut sheets or tend rough edges, levels back and front of
winding machine to wind embossed sheet button blanks and reduces them to
into rolls. May feed plastics sheets to uniform thickness using automatic
machine. machines; makes holes in buttons by
means of automatic drilling machine;
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: cleans buttons prior to polishing by
Code 8142 dipping them in chemicals and wiping
Title Plastic Products Machine them dry; polishes buttons by means of
Operators revolving buffer; examines finished
buttons and rejects faulty ones. May be
8142.1100 designated according to job performed
such as BUTTON HOLE DRILLING MACHINE
Printing Machine Operator (Plastic)
OPERATOR, BUFFING MACHINE
OPERATOR.
Printing Machine Operator; Printer
(Plastics) sets up and operates printing
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine to print colour designs on rolls of
Code 8142
plastics material. Positions and clamps
Title Plastic Products Machine
printing cylinder on press, using hand
Operators
tools; pours inks into ink pans and threads
plastics film through press rolls; starts
8142.1300
press and turns wheels to adjust pick up,
transfer, and printing rolls, turns rheostats Mould Setter (Plastic)
to regulate speed and feed of press, and
VOLUME II B 384
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Mould Setter (Plastics) sets up and adjusts Qualification Pack Details:
compression, injection and similar type of QP NOS Reference ASC/Q4401
machines used to mould plastic materials QP NOS Name Plastic Moulding
to specified shape. Positions assembled Technician or
mould on press bed of moulding machine Operator
or bolts matrix of unassembled mould to NSQF Level 4
bed and aligns die (attached to ram) with
matrix; adjusts stroke of ram, using hand ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
tools. Connects steam, oil or water lines to
Code 8142
mould or moves controls to regulate
Title Plastic Products Machine
mould temperature; sets machine
Operators
controls to regulate forming pressure of
machine and curing time of plastic in
8142.1400
mould; installs knock-out pins in mould,
Moulder, Hand (Plastic)
and makes other adjustments, using hand-
tools; starts machine to produce sample
Moulder, Hand (Plastics) moulds plastics
products; examines sample for surface
sheets into desired shapes in hand
defects, such as bumps, bubbles, and
moulding press. Studies specifications for
scratches, and adjusts machine set up to
moulded product and assembles mould.
eliminate defects; removes, cleans, and
Determines weight of charge, pressure,
greases moulds and places them in
temperature and curing time for
storage racks. May supply plastic
moulding; collects plastic sheets, cuts
materials to moulding machines. May
them to required size and heats them on
direct supplying of necessary equipment,
electrically operated heater to soften for
such as jigs, containers or forms to
moulding; removes sheet when
workers engaged in tending moulding
sufficiently heated and places it in female
machines. May be designated according
of wooden mould, fixes wooden slab of
to type of machine set up, as
mould to keep sheet in position and
COMPRESSION-MOULDING MACHINE SET-
inserts male block of mould; sets mould in
UP MAN; INJECTION MOULDING
hand press and manipulates controls to
MACHINE SET-UP MAN.
compress material and form material to
shape of mould; removes moulded
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
plastics object after specified time-interval
Code 8142
by opening mould; examines and gauges
Title Plastic Products Machine
product for conformity to plant or
Operators
customer standards. May make minor
adjustments in moulding procedure to
8142.1301
eliminate defects, and remould product.
Plastic Moulding Technician or
Operator ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8142
Plastic Moulding Technician or Operator Title Plastic Products Machine
manages the specifications of the plastic Operators
and its granules, setting up and operating
the moulding machinery and forming and 8142.1500
finishing the output.
Cementer (Plastic)
VOLUME II B 385
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Cementer; Assembler (Plastics) joins layup mold or bonding fixture, to shape
plastics sheets and moulded parts with parts. Wraps bonding fixture or mold in
solvents, steel plates, screws, etc. Selects vacuum bagging materials, exhausts air
plastics sheets of specified dimensions; from vacuum bag to prepare lamination
arranges them according to pattern to for curing or bonding. Operates oven to
give required shape. Smoothens and cure parts. Trims, drills, reams,
cleans parts to be assembled; Brushes countersinks, grinds, and finishes parts to
parts with cement or dips them into tank specifications, using templates, hand
containing cement. Assembles parts on jig tools, and power tools. Verifies
and secures them in position with clamps dimensions of parts, using precision
until cement hardens. May join by using instruments, such as dial indicators,
screws and steel plates, etc. micrometres, and callipers. Fits and
assembles parts and attaches hardware
and fittings, such as brackets and hinges,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: using clamps, jigs, fixtures, power tools,
Code 8142 and fasteners. Repairs and reworks
Title Plastic Products Machine damaged or defective parts and
Operators assemblies by lay up, foaming, cementing,
moulding, potting, casting, or similar
8142.1600 methods. May heat parts or materials to
facilitate shaping, using oven or heat gun.
Plastic Fabricator
May fabricate and assemble parts from
fibre reinforced plastics (composites) and
Plastics Fabricator fabricates, assembles,
assorted materials, such as metal and
reworks, and repairs plastic products,
honeycomb.
applying knowledge of working
characteristics of plastics and bonding
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
techniques, using precision instruments,
Code 8142
hand tools, power tools, machines, and
Title Plastic Products Machine
equipment: Reads and interprets
Operators
blueprints, work orders, and related
documentation to determine methods
8142.9900
and sequence of operations and
dimensional and finish specifications. Lays Plastic Products Making
out cutting lines on plastic materials, such Operatives, Other
as sheet stock and fibreglass or graphite
cloth, following template pattern, Plastics Products Making Operatives
blueprints, sketches, or sample part, using perform number of routine and low skilled
measuring and marking instruments. Cuts tasks in manufacturing plastics products,
material to size, using shears, knives, such as arranging and loading plastics or
cutters, scissors, router, or saw. Mixes plastics impregnated sheets, assisting
ingredients, such as resins, catalysts, Printing Machine Operator, cleaning and
fillers, accelerators, and colours, according finishing moulded plastics products etc.
to formulae, manually or using mixer. Sets and are designated as: Laminating Press
up and operates forming machines and Helper (Plastics) if assists Laminating Press
presses, or laminates plastic cloth and Operator by counting sheets of resin-
resins or pre-impregnated cloth onto impregnated wood, fabric, paper, or other
VOLUME II B 386
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
materials, by wiping surface of metal Machine if producing cardboard or
plates with cloth and special solution to paperboard boxes on machine.
prevent sticking, and by stacking sheets
between plain or engraved plates. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8143
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Paper Products Machine Operators
Code 8142
Title Plastic Products Machine 8143.0200
Operators Envelope Maker, Machine
Family 8143
Envelope Maker, Machine; Envelope
Folder; Paper Bag Maker, Machine cuts,
Paper Products Machine Operators
folds and glues edges of paper to make
envelopes and paper bags of required
Paper Products Machine Operators sizes. Collects required quality and
operate and monitor machines which quantity of paper; studies specifications.
produce boxes, envelopes, bags and other Sets and adjusts machine to cut and fold
goods from paper, paperboard, cardboard paper to size of envelope or paper bag to
and similar materials. be made. Feeds blank sheets or roll of
paper into machine; pours into hopper of
machine and regulates its flow; sets
8143.0100
cutting, gluing and folding devices. Presses
Cardboard Box Maker
button to start machine; observes
progress, stops machine to correct faulty
Cardboard Box Maker cuts cardboard
operation; and discharges completed
pieces to required size and shape, folds,
envelopes, bags in containers. Examines
ends and joints to make cardboard boxes.
finished products for quality and makes
Collects required quantity of cardboard or
necessary adjustments to machine to
paper-board blanks. Cuts blanks to
obtain products of correct specifications.
required size according to design or
May mix glue solution. May also set and
specification, by hand or machine; folds
operate a semi-automatic or automatic
sheets along cut or grooved edges to
machine equipped for printing on
make flaps for sides, top and bottom;
products made. May be designated as
glues ends or edges to make cartons or
ENVELOPE MAKER OR PAPER BAG MAKER,
boxes, or fastens parts together with pins
HAND, if produces envelopes or paper
using stapling machine. Covers boxes by
bags by hand, cutting paper to required
gluing protective or decorative paper.
size, folding and joining ends together.
May operate gluing, bending, cutting,
creasing and pinning machines to glue.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Fold or cut cardboards and staple them.
Code 8143
May impregnate box by dipping it in
Title Paper Products Machine Operators
melted wax. May be designated as
Paperboard Box Maker, if using
8143.0300
paperboard for making boxes, containers,
etc. May be designated as Cellophane Bag Maker, Machine
Cardboard/Paperboard Box Maker,
VOLUME II B 387
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Cellophane Bag Maker, Machine sets and Code 8143
operates machine that forms cellophane Title Paper Products Machine Operators
into bags. Sets into machine metal form
on which to shape bag; loads roll of 8143.0500
cellophane on spindle of machine; threads Papier Mache Moulder
cellophane through folding, cutting and
gluing devices; adjusts machine to
Papier Mache Moulder prepares 'papier
produce bags of specified size. Starts
Mache' by mixing glue or rosin with paper
machine by switching on power; observes
pulp and makes statues, toys and other
operation by adjusting tension of parts
novelties by moulding 'papier Mache' to
and material, examines finished products
shape using patterns. Mixes paper pulp,
for quality and specification. May set and
glue and limestone powder in water to
operate machine also equipped for
make into paste; prepares papier sheets
printing information and decoration on
out of paste by using hand roller; takes
bags. May make bags from other
two halves' of appropriate mould or die
materials such as paper etc.
figure or toy, and greases inside of form-
mould 'halves' with brush; places wet
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
'papier Mache' sheets over mould and
Code 8143 presses it hard with hand to form
Title Paper Products Machine Operators impression on 'papier Mache', builds up
form to desired thickness, fitting and
8143.0400 smoothing each sheet to mould; places
Flower Maker, Paper two halves of mould together, pastes and
presses lap projections of each half of
Flower Maker, Paper makes leaves and form together, and leaves mould and cast
flower petals of paper of different shades for drying. Removes completed form from
and colours sets them on wire or bamboo moulds after specified period; trims and
wickers. Collects paper sheets of required smoothens edges, using sand paper, and
quantity, colours and shades for making fixes attachments as required. Places
flowers of desired type; folds and cuts finished products for drying and paints
paper by hand, using pair of scissors or giving finishing touches with ornamental
cutting die for mass production, for decoration. May prepare own colour
preparing flower petals, leaves, etc., schemes for painting forms. May design
shapes, twists and trims, cut bits to form own patterns.
into petals and leaves of desired pattern;
assembles petals and leaves together by ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
gluing around wire stem to make into Code 8143
buds; gives finishing touches by trimming Title Paper Products Machine Operators
and clipping edges and arranging them to
form bunches or bouquet. May make 8143.9900
flowers from cloth or other material. May Paper Product Makers, Other
prepare novelties, such as Chinese
lanterns, flower festoons and paper hand-
Paper Product Maker, Other Makes other
fans.
paper products not elsewhere classified
such as Tube Maker, Paper, if operates
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
power-operated machine which rolls
VOLUME II B 388
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
paper and makes finished paper tubes of 8159 Textile, Fur and Leather Products
required size for use as cover or tubes for Machine Operators, Not Elsewhere
dry battery cells. Paper Coater, if tends Classified
and adjusts machine which coats paper or
board with binding medium and mineral
Family 8151
matter or with tinfoil paste. Colourman, if
Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
mixes material and colours used for
Winding Machine Operators
coating paper on board. Paper-Novelty
Maker if makes paper candy and nut cups
and miscellaneous paper novelties such as Fibre Preparing, Spinning and Winding
hats, party favours, etc. Machine Operators operate and monitor
machines which prepare fibres, and spin,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: double, twist and wind yarn and thread
Code 8143 from natural textile fibres. They twist two
Title Paper Products Machine Operators or more strands of yarn to prepare single
stronger, smoother, uniform and heavier
Group 815 strands and treat textiles to make them
stiff and water resistant.
Textile, Fur and Leather Products
8151.0100
Machine Operators
Garnette Machine Man, Woollen
Textile, Fur and Leather Products Machine
Garnette Machine Man, Wool tends
Operators operate and monitor various
garnette machine for cleaning and turning
types of machines which prepare, process
woollen yarn waste into fluffed wool.
and treat fibres, yarn, thread, leather, fur;
Collects woollen thread waste near feed
produce, modify and repair footwear,
end of garnette machine. Starts machine,
garments and manufacture or dry clean
picks up woollen waste yarn by hand and
textiles or fur and light leather articles.
spreads it evenly on lattice of machine for
cleaning and turning it into fluffed wool.
Occupations in this Group are classified
Removes waste wool from doffer drum of
into the following Families:
machine using hand brush and iron nail
and ensures running of machine. Cleans
8151 Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
and oils machine. May cut hard knots if
Winding Machine Operators
detected in woollen waste yarn with knife.
8152 Weaving and Knitting Machine
Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8153 Sewing Machine Operators
Code 8151
8154 Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
Machine Operators Winding Machine Operators
8155 Fur and Leather Preparing
Machine Operators 8151.0300
8156 Shoe Making and Related Machine Rag Machine Man (Woollen
Operators Textile)
8157 Laundry Machine Operators
VOLUME II B 389
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Rag Machine Man (Woollen Textile) tends Combing Tenter
and feeds rag machine for tearing woollen
rags into fibre. Collects cuttings, rags and Combing Tenter; Comberman (Cotton
woollen cloth near feed end of machine. Textile) tends combing machine for
Sprinkles prescribed quantity of oil on rags combing or separating short fibres from
using sprinkler to soften it. Starts long ones and converting lap into sliver
machine, picks up handful of oiled rags preparatory to drawing. Places lap rolls or
and feeds them on lattice of machine. spools in proper position on creel of
Spreads rags with hand on lattice evenly. combing machine. Pulls out and leads
Maintains regular feed of rags and their ends of lap through assembly on to feed-
flow. Avoids choking of rage machine. rolls. Sets calender rollers to position and
Processes rags and turns it into fibrous starts machine. Watches running of sliver
condition. Removes waste from machine through machine. Detects and joins
parts and cleans machine. May oil and broken ends of sliver. Removes surplus
clean machine. sliver after stopping machine to avoid
jamming and when necessary. Leads web
coming through funnel like guide into can
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: at delivery end and replaces filled can
Code 8151 with empties. Removes waste sliver rolls
Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and from back of machine to specified place or
Winding Machine Operators to waste bag. Cleans and oils machine.
8151.0400 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Doubling-Machine Operator Code 8151
(Textile) Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
Winding Machine Operators
Doubling Machine Operator (Textile)
8151.0600
tends machine that winds two or more
strands of yarn parallel onto bobbin or Spinner, Frame (Textile)/Ring
tube preparatory to twisting: Places Frame Tenter
supply packages in creel and draws yarn
ends through machine guides and Spinner, Frame (Textile) tends spinning
tensions onto take up tube. Starts frame that draws out and twists roving or
machine and observes operation to detect sliver into yarn: Patrols work area and
yarn breaks, exhausting yarn supply and observes spinning to detect nearly
full packages on take up tubes. Pieces up exhausted supply packages and breaks in
yarn breaks, using knotter. Replaces yarn, roving, and sliver. Pieces up breaks
supply packages in creel. Doffs full in yarn, roving, and sliver and replaces
packages. nearly exhausted supply packages with
full packages. Twists end of material from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: supply package to material in machine or
Code 8151 threads material from supply package
Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and through machine guides and drawing
Winding Machine Operators rollers. Brushes yarn or lint from drawing
rollers, guides, and rails. Notifies
8151.0500
VOLUME II B 390
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
designated personnel of machine yarn is pulled from bobbins or cops and
malfunction. May doff machine. wound into coils. Replaces cops or
bobbins when empty with filled ones and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: knots loose ends from new cops or
Code 8151 bobbins to tail ends of coils. Stops
Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and machine when coils of prescribed yardage
Winding Machine Operators are made and removes coils from reel.
May collect together required number of
8151.0700 coil or hanks and make them in knots by
hand. Is designated as RE-REELER or HAND
Drawing Tenter
MAKER when reeling silk yarn.
Drawing Tenter; Draw Frame Tenter;
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Drawing Feeder; Drawing Receivers
Code 8151
(Textile) tends draw frame (machine)
Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
having number of drawing sets, each set
Winding Machine Operators
combining several slivers into one of
nearly same weight and thickness as any
8151.1100
of original sliver. Arranges number of cans
full of card or comber sliver at rear of Reed Man
drawing machine. Threads ends of sliver
from cans through machine. Replaces Reed Man; Reed Repairer (Textile) repairs
empty cans with filled cans, joining ends and replaces broken or defective reeds to
of slivers by matting and rolling them be used in weaving. Locates defective or
together with fingers. Watches slivers broken dents (wires) in reed frame, cuts
running into machine and joins broken out defective portions and nails new piece
ends. Replaces cans when filled at delivery in place and repairs damaged frames.
end with empty ones. Cleans machine and
may oil and varnish top rollers. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8151
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
Code 8151 Winding Machine Operators
Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
Winding Machine Operators 8151.1200
Healdman (Textile)
8151.1000
Reeler Textile Healdman; Heald Repairer (Textile) repairs
and replaces broken or defective healds,
Reeler, Textile operates reeling machine pulls out or cuts them with scissors or
for winding yarn from bobbins or cops pliers and fastens new ones in their place
into coils (skeins or hanks) places yarn by hand or by twisting them into position
bobbins or cops on spindles of machine, with pliers.
pulls ends of yarn from each bobbin or
cop through guide hook and traverse rail ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and loops it to pin on reel. Sets dial that Code 8151
measures yardage of yarn wound. Turns Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
reel by operating lever or by hand so that Winding Machine Operators
VOLUME II B 391
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8151.1300 Yarn Tester tests yarn by using various
Reeler, Silk instruments for ascertaining its strength,
elasticity, thickness, neatness, etc.
conducts various tests such as 'winding-
Reeler, Silk places cooked cocoons in
breaks, test' to ascertain continuity of
basins of reeling machine, containing
hank, ’size test' by using sizing-skein-
taped water. Stirs cocoons in water with
winder to find out thickness of yarn
fingers and draws loose ends of silk
'seriplane test' to find out uniformity and
filament from each cocoon. Collects four
neatness of yarns 'serigraph test' to check
or five loose ends together to form one
strength and elasticity, cohesion test' to
yearn or composite filament depending
find out extent of wear and tear yarn will
on type of thickness of yarn required.
stand, 'conditioning oven test' to fix
Draws ends of silk yarn through hole of
standard weight.
button of reeling machine and over
pulleys. Fastens or ties ends to reel fitted
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to machine. Starts machine and tends
reeling basis to draw out silk filament Code 8151
from cooked cocoons. Ensures that silk Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
yarn or filament is drawn from each Winding Machine Operators
cocoon and twisted and reeled in reeling
frame. Feeds fresh ends of silk filament 8151.1500
from fresh cocoons by throwing ends of Wrapping Boy (Textile)/Wrapper
filament by hand to one already being
reeled and ensures that continuity of Wrapping Boy; Wrapper (Textile) aids in
reeling and thickness of filament is testing wrappings (samples) of sliver,
maintained. Stops machine when silk roving and yarn for count and strength.
filament gets broken. Traces ends from Collects samples of, in specified length,
reel and restores continuity by knotting roving and yarn from drawing and
ends together by hand. Restarts machine spinning departments. Weighs each
and continues reeling. Replaces empty length on scale. Fixes each sample of yarn
spool or reel over machine when existing on testing machine and assists Yarn Tester
reel is fully wound. Collects waste in ascertaining strength, elasticity, twist
filament from basin and dries it in sun for per inch, thickness and uniformity. Cleans
use as waste silk after teasing and and oils the machine. May operate Yarn
cleaning. May oil and clean machine. May examining Board to test evenness of the
re-reel silk thread from small to standard yarn. May check weight of yarn against
reels to form hanks. count. May record temperature and
humidity readings.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8151 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and Code 8151
Winding Machine Operators Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
Winding Machine Operators
8151.1400
Yarn Tester 8151.1600
Pin Setter (Textile)
VOLUME II B 392
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Pin Setter; Needler (Textile) replaces pins Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
or needles in comb circle and gill box Winding Machine Operators
collar of combing and gill box machines.
Examines pins and pulls out defective 8151.1800
ones with pliers. Cleans pin slots, Winder Textile/Winding Operator
hammers in new pins taking care that they
are set straight and firmly. Cleans trash
Winder (Textile) tends winding machine
from pins.
for winding yarn from hanks to bobbins or
from spinning bobbins to other bobbins,
spools, cones, cheeses, etc. Mounts, by
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
hand, hanks on swift (reel) or mounts full
Code 8151 bobbins, cones, etc., on stands of
Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and machine. Draws end of yarn from each
Winding Machine Operators hank or full bobbin, through guide and
tension arm and loops it round rotating
8151.1700 empty bobbin, cone, cheese or spool, for
Roller Coverer winding. Pieces broken ends. Removes
wound cones, cheeses, spools, etc., from
Roller Coverer; Roll Covering Man spindles and replaces them with empty
operates and resurfaces metal drawing ones. Is designated as GREY WINDER,
rolls of various spinning, combing and PIRN WINDER, CHEESE WINDER, CONE
lapping machines with new rubber or WINDER, SPOOL WINDER, COP WINDER,
leather covers. Cuts defective cover from UNIVERSAL WINDER, COLOUR WINDER,
drawing roll and uses it as pattern for TAILING MAN, etc., according to type of
cutting new one from rubber or leather. machine operated and bobbin or spool
washes roller with steam or caustic soda used.
solution. Inserts cover and metal roller
into roller cover machine which ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
automatically mounts cover on roller. Code 8151
Transfers roller to buffing machine and Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
buffs cover to smooth surface and Winding Machine Operators
uniform thickness. Varnishes cleaned
roller and wraps with flannel replacing 8151.1900
leather cover. Forms leather sleeve by
Size Mixer (Textile)
gluing together sides of previously cut
leather cover; pulls sleeve by gluing
Size Mixer; Starch Mixer (Textile) prepares
together sides of previously cut leather
sizing for use in stiffening and finishing
cover; pulls sleeve over roller with aid of
cloth and yarn. Measures or weighs
hand operated device and seals ends of
ingredients such as starch, tallow, resins,
leather cover by painting with chemical
soaps and water according to instructions,
solution. May substitute cork or other
mixes them in tank of mixer, opens steam
synthetic covering for rubber or leather.
valve and allows mixture to mix and boil
for specified time. Opens outlet valve to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
discharge contents to sizing department.
Code 8151
Cleans mixer and measuring pots.
VOLUME II B 393
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8151 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and W Code 8151
inding Machine Operators Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
Winding Machine Operators
8151.2000
Waterproofer, Textile 8151.2200
Fetler (Woollen Textile)
Waterproofer, Textile treats textiles with
chemicals (other than rubber) to make Fetler (Woollen Textile) cleans rollers and
them water resistant. Fills container with cylinders of carding machines to remove
chemical solution (other than rubber) and wool waste. Removes, slides off, or
controls its temperature. Feeds lengths of otherwise disconnects belts and chains
material into rollers and joins ends that drive machine. Climbs on machine,
together. Passes material through rollers slowly rotates rollers and cylinders by
into solution until it is impregnated and hand picks out accumulated dirt, fibres
removes folds and creases, if any. Cleans and foreign matter and assures that
equipment and maintains them in working moving parts operate freely. Reconnects
order. May combine dyeing process with drive mechanism. Attends to cards until
waterproofing; chemicals used and cards get filled with material. Assists
experience of controlling solution Condenser Minder in taking out ends and
temperature; knowledge of combining putting them on proper position on
dyeing process with waterproofing and if condenser bobbins. May attend to card
also able to treat textiles with rubber. mounting and assist in repair work of
cards.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8151 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and Code 8151
Winding Machine Operators Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
Winding Machine Operators
8151.2100
Weighter, Silk 8151.9900
Fibre Preparing, Spinning and
Weighter, Silk treats silk with solutions of Winding Machine Operators, Other
tin and phosphates (chemicals) to give it
weight or body. Wraps silk in blanket or Fibre Preparing, Spinning and Winding
coarse canvas and places it in container of Machine Operators, Other include
centrifugal machine. Pumps solution of tin workers who operate and monitor
from mixing vat into machine and runs it machines which prepare fibres, and spin,
for set period, keeping material immersed double, twist and wind yarn and thread
in solution. Draws off solution and not elsewhere classified.
transfers material to spray-washing
machine. Returns material to centrifugal
machine containing phosphates and runs
it to fix tin to silk. Repeats process, as ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
necessary to obtain desired weight.
Code 8151
VOLUME II B 394
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Title Fibre Preparing, Spinning and Doffer, Fly Frame: Doffer Boy (Textile)
Winding Machine Operators replaces bobbins filled at slubbing, inter or
roving frames with empty bobbins. Brings
Family 8152 empty bobbins and keeps them in
between spindles. Removes filled bobbins
Weaving and Knitting Machine from spindles and places empties instead.
Loops ends of rovings around empty
Operators
bobbins for winding. Cleans frames.
Weaving and Knitting Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
set up, operate and monitor weaving and
Code 8152
knitting machines which process yarn or
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
thread into woven, non-woven and
Operators
knitted products such as cloth, lace,
carpets, rope, industrial fabric, hosiery
8152.0300
and knitted garments or to quilt and
embroider fabric. Knitting Jobber
Knitting Jobber; Knitting Mistry; Knitting
8152.0100
Machine Fixer; Fixer, Knitting Machine
Drawing Man
sets and adjusts knitting machines
according to design, shape and size of
Drawing Man; Drawer; Reducer (Woollen
product desired. Inspects product of
Textile) tends drawing frame for drawing
machines for defects in knitting and
wool sliver into yarn. Fixes empty bobbins
makes necessary adjustments. Replaces
on spindles. Arranges sliver cans at feed
broken or worn out parts. Repairs and
end of drawing frame. Draws sliver from
overhauls machines. Supervises work of
can and passes them through guides,
knitters and ensures quality and
rollers and gill-box and loops them around
production.
bobbins on spindle. Starts drawing frame.
Detects broken ends, stops machine and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
pieces (joins) them by hand. Ensures
Code 8152
continuous flow of sliver. Removes
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
jamming when necessary by stopping
Operators
machine and withdrawing surplus wool.
Replaces filled bobbins with empty ones.
8152.0400
Removes waste wool from machine and
work area. May clean and oil machine. Card Cutter
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Card Cutter; Punch Operator (Textile)
Code 8152 operates card cutting machine for
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine punching holes in card used for controlling
Operators pattern of cloth woven on jacquard or
dobby looms. Studies designs. Spreads
graph paper on table and prepares draft
8152.0200
and plan for design, indicating places
Doffer, Fly Frame/Speed Frame
where warp is to be raised over weft.
Operator
Fixes graph paper containing design on
VOLUME II B 395
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
machine board. Inserts plan card into Flat Knitter, Machine-Flat Knitting
cutting machine equipped with key-board. Machine Operator; Flat Knitting Machine
Depresses key with fingers to punch holes Man operates knitting machine for
into card as per diagram for controlling producing flat fabric (as distinct from
pattern on cloth woven. Presses lever by tubular or circular fabric). Places cones of
leg to push punched card into inner yarn on stand of machine and threads
portion of machine making room for ends of yarn through guides and feeders.
punching unpunched portion. Numbers Starts machine. Replaces empty cones
punched cards serially and inserts them in with filled ones and joins broken ends.
pegs in stand for subsequent lacing. Fixes Cleans machine. Replaces defective or
and adjusts heald and card chain on broken needles. May oil and clean
jacquard machine. May prepare design for machine.
lattice pegging. May do lacing of cards by
hand or machine to make complete ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
design. May do lattice pegging. May fix up Code 8152
heald and lattice on dobby loom. Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8152 8152.0700
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine Sock Knitter/Knitting machine
Operators
Operator-Socks Knitting
8152.0500
Sock Knitter; Sock Knitting Machine Man;
Mat Shearing Operator
Sock Knitting Machine Operator operates
machine for knitting heel and toes of
Mat Shearing; Mat Trimmer (Coir) socks into ribs or tops cut from circular
operates shearing and trimming machine fabric. Places cones of yarn on stand of
to make surface and edges of mats even. machine. Threads yarn through guides
Sets machine depth of shearing by and feeders. Sets loops of one end of top
adjusting gap between roller and blades. on pins of transfer dial or ring, sets
Feeds mat into machine which clips off transfer ring by hand over needles of
high fibres. Trims sheared mat on all sides knitting machine and turns handle that
by holding aides between blades and transfers loops from pins of ring to
roller. Removes loose fibres from surface. needles of machine. Starts machine that
May repeat process if additional shearing knits rest of sock into top. Removes
is required. knitted material from machine. Replaces
empty cones with full ones and joins ends.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Replaces defective or broken needles.
Code 8152 Cleans and oils machine.
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
Operators ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8152
8152.0600 Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
Flat Knitter, Machine/Knitting Operators
Machine Operator-Flat Knitting
8152.0800
VOLUME II B 396
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Sock Knitter, Automatic Machine sinkers (mechanism that pushes thread
over needles to form new loops).
Sock Knitter, Automatic Machine;
Automatic Sock Knitting Machine ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Operator operates knitting machine for Code 8152
knitting all parts of sock such as rib top or Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
elastic top, leg, heel, foot and toe in Operators
continuous tube. Adjusts machine
according to size of sock to be knitted. 8152.1000
Places filled cones of yarn on stand of Looper Man, Hosiery
machine. Threads ends of yarn through
guides and feeders. Turns cylinder by
Looper Man, Hosiery; Linking Machine
handle so that all ends are caught by
Operator, Hosiery; Linking Machine Man
latches of needles set in cylinder. Starts
Hosiery operates machine which seams
machine. Replaces empty cones with full
openings in toes of socks. Places cones of
ones and joins ends. Replaces defective or
yarn on stand of machine, and threads
broken needles and sinkers (mechanism
yarn through guide, tension disc and eye
that pushes thread over needles to form
of needle. Sets loops of socks on looper
new loops). Oils and cleans machine.
pins or points of a circular dial. Starts
machine. Replaces empty cone with filled
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
one; cleans and oils machine and replaces
Code 8152 defective pins.
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
Operators ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8152
8152.0900
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
Knitter, Machine/Knitting Machine Operators
Operator
8152.1100
Knitter, Machine; Circular Knitting Warp Knitter/Knitting Machine
Machine Tenter; Circular Knitter, Tube Operator-Warp Knitter
Knitter operates one or more machines
that knit seamless circular or tubular
Warp Knitter tends machine for knitting
fabric from yarn. Places filled cones of
fabric used for mosquito nets, curtains
yarn on stand of machine. Threads ends of
etc. Mounts yarn beam on frame of
yarn from cones through guides, tension
machine. Draws ends of yarn from beam
springs and feeders and turns cylinder by
through guides and feeders. Operates
handle so that yarn is caught by latches of
machine by hand till knitted fabric reaches
all needles in cylinder. Starts machine
roller. Ties end of fabric to roller. Starts
which automatically knits fabric. Watches
machine and joins broken ends as
for defects in knitting. Replaces empty
necessary. Cuts and removes knitted
cones with full ones and joins ends.
fabric from machine. Cleans and oils
Removes knitted fabric by cutting it with
machine.
scissors. Cleans and oils machine.
Replaces broken or defective needles and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8152
VOLUME II B 397
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine Selects pattern of lace or trimming and
Operators places bobbins of selected threads on
machine. Passes ends of thread from each
8152.1200 bobbin through machine guides and eye
Weaver, Lace (Machine) of machine needle. Knots ends together
and passes it over reel on machine.
Adjusts machine for thread tension and
Weaver, Lace (Machine) operates lace-
clockwise or anti-clockwise movement of
making machines to weave lace according
spindles according to pattern of lace, knit
to set pattern. Starts machine and ensures
required, etc. Starts machine. Arranges
that weaving is proceeding correctly.
material in position for crocheting and
Mends broken threads by hand and
guides it under needle. Detects and joins
removes faulty pieces. Keeps machine
broken ends of thread by hand as
supplied with yarn. Reports mechanical
necessary. Checks running of yarn through
faults to Jobber to get defects removed.
each spindle. Stops machine and replaces
May pass threads through machine guides
empty bobbins and broken needles during
in preparation for weaving and make
operation. Collects knitted lace,
minor adjustments.
trimmings, etc.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8152
Code 8152
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
Operators
Operators
8152.1300
8152.1600
Braid Maker, Machine/Braiding
Warp Tying Machine Man
Machine Operator
Warp-Tying Machine Man operates warp-
Braid Maker, Machine operates one or
typing machine which knots warp ends
more machines to interweave threads
from filled loom beam to ends from
into tabular cord or narrow band. Passes
exhausted beam. Checks if both beams
thread through machine guides. Starts
have been properly set on warp-tying
machine and ensures that braiding is
frame and ties lease string to separate
processing correctly. Maintains supply of
layers of yarn on beams. Sets machine in
thread and mends breakages.
frame, turns hand crank to see if machine
gathers end correctly and adjusts machine
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
if necessary. Switches on machine for
Code 8152
automatic knotting of ends. Knots, by
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
hand ends not tied by machine. Cleans
Operators
and oils machine.
8152.1400
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Lace Maker (Machine)
Code 8152
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
Lace Maker, Machine; Crocheter, Machine Operators
operates crochet machines to knit lace,
trimming etc. of desired pattern or design. 8152.1700
VOLUME II B 398
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Warper Counts and distributes ends in wraith
(zigzag comb) according to specified
Warper; Beamer tends warping machine pattern. Starts machine. Detects broken
for drawing and winding on a large spool ends during run of machine, slows down
(beam) many strands of yarn from several machine, twists together broken ends of
cones, cheeses or bobbins arranged on a corresponding ends and returns machine
creel. Fixes empty beam or drum in to normal speed. Ensures that yarn
brackets of machine. Adjusts length receives proper amount and consistency
gauge. Draws each thread through of size and is being dried sufficiently.
appropriate guide, dent and drop pin. Stops machine when required amount of
Fastens all ends to beam or loops them on warp has been wound on weaver's beam.
hook of drum. Starts machine and Cuts warp yarn, ties ends into 2 to 3
observes winding of yarn on beam bunches or ties a gum tape and removes
whenever machine stops automatically, weaver's beam with overhead hoist or by
gets end of yarn brought from creel by hand. Supervises work of Back Sizer.
Endman and pieces ends. Stops machine Cleans and oils machine.
when required length has been wound,
cuts yarn strands between comb and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
beam, knots all ends together into two or Code 8152
three bunches and removes beam from Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
machine with help of Endman. Is Operators
designated as BEAMER when warping
yarn from section drums to weaver's 8152.2100
beam. Back Sizer
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Back Sizer (Cotton Textile) assists Front
Code 8152 Sizer in setting and operating sizing
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine machine. Helps in loading warp beams on
Operators back creel of machine by hand or by
8152.2000 chain-pulley and in drawing ends through
Front Sizer (Cotton Textile) machine. Places lease strings across warp
ends coming from warp beams to divide
Front Sizer (Cotton Textile) tends sizing them into different layers. Detects broken
machine for drawing warp yarn through ends at rear of machine and joins them
sizing solution and drawing devices to together. Maintains required quantity and
condition and strengthen it and to wind it temperature of sizing solution in sow-box
on the weaver’s beam. Lifts warp beams or sizing-back. Takes off flannel from
assisted by Back Sizer and puts them on sizing roller and washes it when
back creel or machine by hand or by chain necessary. Removes empty beams and
pulley. Gathers ends into bunches and ties assists Front Sizer in cleaning and oiling
them to corresponding bunches of ends machine.
left threaded through machine from
previous run. Pulls ends from warp beam, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
when machine is empty, through sow box, Code 8152
around drying cylinders and on to weavers Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
beam set in brackets in front of machine. Operators
VOLUME II B 399
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8152.9900 material to be sewed and lowers pressure
Weaving and Knitting Machine foot on material. Starts machine and
guides material to be sewed under needle
Operators, Other
of machine. Observes stitches while
sewing. Stops machine, breaks and cuts
Weaving and Knitting Machine Setters and
threads and removes sewed material.
Pattern Card Prepares, Other include all
Replaces empty spool and bobbin with full
other workers engaged in setting weaving
ones as and when necessary. Cleans and
and knitting machines and in preparing
oils machine. May remove minor faults
pattern cards for weaving designs, not
and assist in repairs and overhauling of
elsewhere classified.
sewing machine. May set and attach
special gadgets to machine for having
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
special type of stitches. May be
Code 8152
designated according to type of machine
Title Weaving and Knitting Machine
operated such as BLIND STITCH MACHINE
Operators
OPERATOR; ZIG-ZAG MACHINE
OPERATOR; BAR TACKING MACHINE
Family 8153
OPERATOR; TURNING AND PRESSING
MACHINE OPERATOR; SHOULDER STRAP
Sewing Machine Operators
TURNING MACHINE OPERATOR; POSTBED
MACHINE OPERATOR; DOUBLE NEEDLE
Sewing Machine Operators operate and SEWING MACHINE OPERATOR; etc.
monitor sewing machines to make, repair, Qualification Pack Details:
darn and renovate textile, fur, synthetic or QP NOS Reference AMH/Q0301
leather garments or embroider QP NOS Name Sewing Machine
ornamental designs on garments or other Operator
materials. They operate button hole NSQF Level 4
making and eyelet holing machines to cut
holes, stitch around holes, stitch buttons ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and fix eyelets to garments.
Code 8153
Title Sewing Machine Operators
8153.0101
Sewing Machine Operator, General 8153.0102
Stitcher (Leather Goods and
Sewing Machine Operator, General;
Garments)
Stitcher Machine (Textile and Fur
products) operates sewing machine to join
Stitcher (Leather Goods and Garments),
pieces of cloth, hosiery fabric, canvas, fur
also called a ‘sewer’ is an important job-
and leather for making garments, bags,
role associated with Leather Goods and
upholstery and other textile and fur
Garment sector. The primary
products. Places spools of required type
responsibility of a stitcher is to sew fabric,
and colour of thread and winds bobbins
fur, leather or synthetic materials to
on machine. Draws thread under tension
produce garments and other articles.
spring and through guides into eye of
needle. Adjusts tension on thread and sets
Qualification Pack Details:
number of stitches per inch if necessary.
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q6101
Raises pressure foot of machine to admit
VOLUME II B 400
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
QP NOS Name Stitcher (Leather and stitches around hole. May clean and
Goods and oil machine.
Garments)
NSQF Level 4 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8153
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Sewing Machine Operators
Code
Title 8153.0300
Eyelet Holing Machine Operator
8153.0103
Specialized Sewing Machine Eyelet Holing Machine Operator operates
Operator eyelet machine to punch and stitch holes
for fixing eyelets in garments. Selects
Specialized Sewing Machine Operator is thread of required colour and shade
responsible for operating the specialized matching cloth and puts thread reel on
sewing machine to sew different kinds of machine or creel. Sets wound bobbin into
stitches on fabric/garments in the apparel shuttle of machine. Pulls thread through
industry. guide into eye of needle and sets thread
tension by screwing regulator. Fixes punch
Qualification Pack Details: of required size in machine and adjusts it.
Operates foot pedal to raise pressure foot
QP NOS Reference AMH/Q 2301
of machine and admits marked portion of
QP NOS Name Specialized Sewing
garment where eyelet hole is to be made
Machine Operator
below it. Positions marked portion to
NSQF Level 4
garment below pressure foot and releases
pressure foot to hold it. Starts machine
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
which automatically drops punch to cut
Code 8153
hole and stitches it on both sides of
Title Sewing Machine Operators
material. Replaces broken needle and
empty shuttle as and when necessary.
8153.0200
May operate different types of machine
Button Hole Maker, Machine
according to fabric and regulate super-
tension of thread movement. May adjust
Button-Hole Maker, Machine; Button-Hole number of stitches per inch.
Machine Operator operates button-hole
making machine which cuts holes and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
stitches around holes automatically.
Code 8153
Mounts spool of thread and wound
Title Sewing Machine Operators
bobbin on machine. Draws thread through
guides and eye of needle. Adjusts gauge
8153.0400
according to size of hole required. Presses
Button Stitching Machine Operator
pedal to raise pressure-foot, inserts part
of garment where button-holes are to be
Button Stitching Machine Operator;
made and adjusts it. Releases pedal to
Button Stitcher, Machine operates button
lower pressure foot. Presses another
stitching machine which stitches buttons
pedal to start machine which cuts hole
to garments. Mounts spool of required
VOLUME II B 401
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
type of thread and wound bobbin on 8153.0600
machine and draws thread through guides Embroidery-Machine Operator
and eye of needle Presses pedal to raise
(Semi-Automatic)
pressured foot of machine and inserts
part of garment where buttons are to be
Embroidery Machine Operator (Semi-
stitched under it. Places button in clamp
Automatic) tends semiautomatic sewing
over pressure-foot and releases pedal to
machine with multiple-sewing heads
lower pressure foot. Starts machine which
controlled by pattern chain that
automatically stitches button. May clean
embroiders designs on garments or
and oil machine and attend to minor
garment parts: Positions garment or part
repairs.
over embroidery hoops arranged in hoop
frame, following edges or markings on
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
fabric. Places hoop frame on machine bed
Code 8153
and turns thumbscrews to secure frame to
Title Sewing Machine Operators
machine. Presses button to start machine
that sews design onto garment or part
8153.0500
and stops, or sews one colour of multiple-
Embroider, Machine colour design and stops. When sewing
multiple-colour designs, rethreads
Embroider, Machine embroiders various machine with subsequent colours of
designs on fabric or garments by thread and starts machine to complete
machines. Selects size and colour of design. Removes hoop frame from
thread and amounts bobbins of thread or machine on completion of design and
machine. Threads needle and passes yarn removes garment or part from hoops.
through carrier of machine. Adjusts
machine for thread tension and type of ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
stitch. Presses lever to raise needle and Code 8153
inserts material under it. Guides material Title Sewing Machine Operators
or sewing arm of machine in accordance
with drawing or outline or guide points of 8153.0601
pantograph on enlarged design. Changes
Embroidery Machine Operator (Zig
thread as required and replaces empty
Zag Machine)
bobbins and broken needles. Removes
article when embroidering is complete.
Embroidery Machine Operator is
Cleans and oils machine. May mark
responsible for operating the embroidery
outlines of design on material before
machine to embroider decorative designs
embroidery is started. May operate
on fabric/garments in the apparel
machine which embroiders several articles
industry. The Embroidery Machine
or designs at one time. May be designated
Operator is able to perform different
as CROCHETING MACHINE OPERATOR if
kinds of stitches and decorative work such
embroiders designs using crocheting
as running shade work, cording and satin
machine.
stitch, eyelet work, appliqué work, shade
work and round, cutwork and open work,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
pin stitch and pitch stitch, china
Code 8153
embroidery and fancy embroidery.
Title Sewing Machine Operators
VOLUME II B 402
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Qualification Pack Details: Helper-Parts Making (Leather Goods and
QP NOS Reference AMH/Q0801 Garments) provides assistance to the
QP NOS Name Embroidery Goods and Garments Machine Operators
Machine Operator involved in material cutting, stitching,
(Zigzag Machine) skiving, pasting etc. A Helper is required
NSQF Level 4 to co-ordinate with team members and is
required to assist the operators to carry
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: out activities based on the production
schedule.
Code 8153
Title Sewing Machine Operators
Qualification Pack Details:
8153.0701 QP NOS Reference LSS/Q6102
QP NOS Name Helper-Parts
Framer-Computerised Embroidery
Making (Leather
Machine
Goods & Garments)
NSQF Level 2
Framer of a Computerized Embroidery
Machine is responsible for preparation
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and setup of the embroidery machine for
Code 8153
embroidery and carries out hooping and
Title Sewing Machine Operators
framing operations. The Framer is also
responsible for removal of frame and
8153.0703
fabric panel once the embroidery has
Helper-Finishing Operations
been completed. While the embroidery is
done through the computerized (Leather Goods and Garments)
embroidery machine, the Framer needs to
monitor the progress, and ensure the Helper – Finishing Operation (Leather
required quality of embroidery is Goods and Garments) provides assistance
achieved. to the Goods and Garments Machine
Operators involved in colouring, lamping,
Qualification Pack Details: cleaning and packaging etc. A Helper is
QP NOS Reference AMH/Q1301 required to co-ordinate with team
QP NOS Name Framer- members and is required to assist the
Computerised operators to carry out activities based on
Embroidery the production schedule.
Machine
NSQF Level 4 Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q6201
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: QP NOS Name Helper – Finishing
Code 8153 Operation (Leather
Title Sewing Machine Operators Goods & Garments)
NSQF Level 2
8153.0702 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Helper-Parts Making (Leather Code 8153
Title Sewing Machine Operators
Goods and Garments)
8153.9900
VOLUME II B 403
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Sewers and Embroiders, Other Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
Machine Operators
Sewers and Embroiders, Other include all
other sewers and embroiders engaged in 8154.0300
hand and machine sewing and Scouring Man, Woollen Yarn
embroidering textile and kindered
materials such as those sewing and Scouring Man, Woollen yarn; Scourer,
embroidering household linen, hats, caps, Woollen Yarn tends scouring machine for
upholstery, mattresses, etc., not washing and cleaning woollen or worsted
elsewhere classified. yarn preparatory to further processing.
Prepares required amount of detergent by
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: mixing soap and soda in water and pours
Code 8153 it into bowls of scouring machine. Sets
Title Sewing Machine Operators machine in operation and feeds woollen
yarn into carrier of machine. Applies
wooden presses to press yarn under
Family 8154 rollers and allows it to pass through
various processes of cleaning and washing
Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning in detergent to prepare it for further
processing. Checks pressure gauges to
Machine Operators
ensure proper functioning of machine.
Stops machine on completion of washing
Bleaching, Dyeing and Fabric Cleaning
and cleans and oils machine. May feed
Machine Operators operate and monitor
raw wool into scouring machine to clean
machines that bleach, shrink, dye, and
dirt. May operate drier for drying cleaned
otherwise treat fibres, yarn or cloth.
wool.
8154.0200
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Kierman (Textile)/Package Dyeing
Code 8154
Machine Operator Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
Kierman (Textile) tends kier (vat for Machine Operators
boiling yarn or cloth) for bleaching and 8154.0500
dyeing. Puts chemicals in tanks and lets in Washing Machine Man
water and opens steam to boil chemical
solution. Puts cloth or yarn into kier with
Washing Machine Man; Bleaching
help of Piler ensuring that cloth or yarn is
Machine Man; Craft-Machine Man;
properly piled. Closes and secures mouth
Chemicking Machine Man; Desizing
of kier and pumps chemical solution from
Machine Man; Scouring Machine Man
tank into kier. Checks level and circulation
tends machine for washing and bleaching
of solution, controls temperatures and
cloth. Checks level and flow of water or
pressure in kier and ensures that yarn or
chemical solution in pit, passes end of
cloth is properly boiled.
cloth through loops and rollers and starts
machine. Stops machine if cloth gets
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
entangled in loops or rollers; makes
Code 8154 necessary adjustments and runs machine.
VOLUME II B 404
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Supervises work of Pilers and cleans and Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
oils machine. Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 8154.0800
Code 8154 Scutcher Man, Bleaching
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
Machine Operators Scutcher Man, Bleaching; Cloth Opener
(Cotton Textile) tends scutcher machine
8154.0600 for opening folds and removing creases
De-Gummer, Silk and twists formed in cloth due to washing
and bleaching and to spread it into sheet.
De-Gummer, Silk treats silk yarn, cloth or Starts machine and feeds one end of piled
piece goods to remove natural gum. Fills and twisted cloth into scutcher. Unfurls
container with water. Raises water to twisted cloth mechanically or manually
required temperature, adds soap or other and allows cloth to pass centrally through
cleansing agent to it and controls rollers to turn it into cloth sheet. Collects
temperature of solution. Places skeins of spread out cloth sheet at other end of
yarns in boiling solution or on revolving machine. Cleans and oils machine. May
arms of container. Attaches cloth or piece operate washing and bleaching machine.
goods to suspended rods, canes or metal
frames and moves these through solution. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Rinses material in hot water. Drains and Code 8154
cleans container. May do drying. Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8154 8154.0900
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning Dyed-Yarn Operator (Textile)
Machine Operators
8154.0700 Dyed Yarn Operator (Textile) tends
Carboniser, Textile machine that coats fibreglass sliver with
dye: Places supply package on machine
Carboniser, Textile treats wool, woollen platform and threads sliver through
rags or clothes to remove vegetable guides, over tension bars and dye roller
matter. Feeds material into bath applicator, through traverse guide, and
containing weak solution of sulphuric or attaches sliver to take-up package. Pours
other acid to carbonise matter. Allows or turns valve to admit dye solution into
material to soak, passes it through rollers trough of dye roller applicator. Pushes
to remove solution and then transfers it to lever to lower winding head and start
bath containing alkaline solution to machine. Observes flow of sliver through
neutralise acidity. Dries it and feeds it machine to detect breaks in sliver and ties
through rollers to pulverise matter. broken sliver by hand. Cuts sliver, using
Shakes out matter by hand or machine. scissors, and doffs packages of dyed sliver
from machine.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8154
Code 8154
VOLUME II B 405
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning based on knowledge of dyeing processes
Machine Operators and familiarity with affinity of dyes to
specific thread types. Depresses keys of
8154.1000 data-entry unit to enter required data into
Jigger Man (Cotton Textile)/Jigger computer. Observes display screen to
verify data entered, to ascertain computer
Machine Operator
response to instruction entered, and to
determine compliance with procedural
Jigger Man (Cotton Textile) dyes cloth by
steps. Depresses keys to edit instructions
operating jigger machine. Fits undyed
when necessary and to input answers for
cloth rolls on machine and passes one end
primary or alternate steps in procedure.
of rolled cloth carefully through vat on to
Hangs tags on dye board, during shift, to
other roller for making rolls of dyed cloth.
indicate steps in dyeing process for each
Prepares dyeing solution of required
machine. Confers with workers to
shade, pours it into jigger vat and ensures
determine reasons for delays in dyeing
that cloth passing through vat is
process, and examines dyeing machines
completely dipped in dyeing solution.
and equipment to ascertain reason for
Starts machine. Allows undyed cloth to
malfunctions. Notifies supervisor of
unroll from roller, pass through colouring
malfunctions, and records reasons for
solution in jigger vat to get dyed and then
delays in log. Receives instructions from
get rolled on other roller. Takes proper
supervisor, such as alteration of dyeing
care to maintain temperature and level of
temperature, omission of specific steps in
dye liquor and ensures proper dyeing of
dyeing process, or repetition of specific
cloth without spots and creases. Gets
steps. Keys in dyeing instruction changes.
sample of dyed cloth approved. Cleans
Confers with Operator on previous shift to
and oils jigger machine. May operate
ascertain drying steps to complete dyeing
automatic or ordinary jigger machine.
in progress.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8154
Code 8154
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
Machine Operators
Machine Operators
8154.1100
Dye Automation Operator
8154.1200
(Textile)/Dyeing Machine Operator
Wool Dyer
Dye Automation Operator (Textile)
Wool Dyer; Woollen Yarn Dyer tends
controls and monitors programmed
dyeing machine to dye wool or yarn. Puts
electronic equipment to bleach, dye, and
by hand wool or yarn hanks into cage or
finish cotton and synthetic sewing
bowl of machine. Pours in water to soak
threads: Confers with Operator of dye
material. Mixes dye as per instructions in
machines to obtain information needed to
bucket or in overhead tank. Pours dye
process customer orders, and records
solution into bowl of machine or opens
data, such as number of dyeing machines
valve to let in dye solution through pipe.
to be used, production order numbers,
Starts pump to put heated dye solution
and colour numbers specified for dye
into circulation through wool or yarn.
orders. Selects programmed procedures
VOLUME II B 406
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Stops machine when wool or yarn has Damping Machine Attendant; Damping
been dyed. Drains off dye solution by Machine Man; Cloth Conditioning Man
opening outlet. Pours water from tap to tends damping machine for spraying cloth
cool wool or yarn and to wash off excess with solution to prepare it for calendering.
dye. Takes out dyed wool or yarn from Fills tank of machine with solution, passes
machine. end of cloth through machine and runs
machine for spraying solution on cloth.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Ensures that cloth passes through
Code 8154 machine without folds and is uniformly
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning damped. Cleans machine.
Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8154.1500 Code 8154
Dyer Garment Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
Machine Operators
Dyer, Garment dyes garments to desired
8154.1800
colours after washing, dry-cleaning or
bleaching if necessary. Cleans garments by Calenderman (Cotton Textile)
washing, dry-cleaning or bleaching to
remove dirt, spots or foreign matter, if Calenderman (Cotton Textile) tends
any. Prepares dye solution in container by calendering machine for glazing and
mixing required colour in hot water; finishing cloth. Piles and fits roll of cloth at
controls temperature of solution; tests back of machine and feeds its loose end
strength of solution and colour by treating into calender rollers. Adjusts pressure on
small piece of cloth. Immerses garment in cloth by winding screws on rollers and
solution and agitates it by hand or starts machine. Observes gauges to
mechanically and inspects garment after control injection of steam into rollers for
prescribed period for desired colour. heating them to required temperature
Stops, continues or adjusts treatment and ensures that cloth passing through
according to result of inspection. Removes rollers is without crease and is being
garment from container when properly uniformly pressed and glazed to desired
dyed and passes it on for rinsing and finish. Stops machine, as required and
drying. Drains or cleans container. May do removes nails, leather hits etc. noticed on
rinsing or drying. May dye leather cloth. Folds finished cloth at front end of
garments using spray and be known as machine. May work at feeding end as
DYE-SPRAYER. BACK CALENDERMAN or at receiving end
as FRONT CALENDERMAN.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8154 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning Code 8154
Machine Operators Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
Machine Operators
8154.1700
Damping Machine Attendant 8154.1900
Miller
VOLUME II B 407
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Miller; Milling Machine Man (Woollen 8154.2100
Textile) tends milling machine to soften, Stentering Machine
shrink and strengthen woollen cloth.
Man/Stentering Operator
Passes one end of cloth through draft
board to wooden rolls of milling machine.
Stentering Machine Man; Tenter Machine
Stitches, by hand or machine, both ends
Man; Tentering Machine Man (Textile)
of cloth to make it one endless piece.
tends stentering machine or frame which
Starts machine and ensures that cloth
dries and restores original width of cloth
runs through it smoothly. Pours soap
after dyeing, washing or finishing. Adjusts
solution over running cloth as required
stenter frames according to width of
and checks texture of cloth milled. Stops
cloth. Starts machine. Ensures that cloth
machine after specified time, cuts,
passes through machine without damage
stitches and takes out cloth from machine.
from stenter clips and is properly
May check width of cloth at regular
stretched. May be known as ASSISTANT
intervals during milling.
STENTERING MACHINE MAN or BACK
STENTERING MACHINE MAN if working at
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
delivery end of machine. Cleans and oils
Code 8154
machine.
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8154
8154.2000
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
Raising Machine Man (Textile)
Machine Operators
Raising Machine Man (Textile) tends 8154.2200
raising machine which raises fibres on
Cropper
surface of cloth by means of wire-covered
rollers and brushes for use as lint, blanket,
Cropper; Cropping Machine Man;
flannel etc. Stitches ends of cloth pieces to
Shearing Machine Man (Textile) tends
obtain continuous piece. Passes one end
machine for cropping excess fibre from
of cloth through guides and rollers of
cloth for giving it smooth and even finish.
machine and starts machine. Ensures that
Adjusts cropping gauge according to
cloth passes through rollers without folds
requirements. Passes end of cloth through
or crease and fibres are properly raised on
machine. Starts machine. Ensures that
its surface for use as flannel, lint, etc.
cloth is properly stretched and passes
Observes gauges and adjusts speed and
through machine without creases.
pressure of rollers as required to avoid
damage to cloth while processing. Gets
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sample of raised cloth approved and
Code 8154
removes it from machine. Cleans and oils
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
machine.
Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8154.2300
Code 8154
Padding Machine Man/Padding
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
Machine Operators Mangle Operator
VOLUME II B 408
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Padding Machine Man (Textile) tends Crabbing Machine Man (Woollen Textile)
padding machine for treating cloth with tends crabbing machine for setting weave
light preliminary coat of dye or chemicals and giving stability to woollen cloth. Sets
preparatory to further processing. Mounts cloth roll at feed end of machine. Passes
cloth roll on machine and passes loose end of cloth length through guides and
end of cloth through guide-rollers and roller of machine and fixes it with
trough to roller at opposite side. Pours collecting cylinder for processing in hot
dye or chemical solution into trough of water tank and winding it into roll. Fills
machine and ensures that cloth is tank with water and opens steam valve to
completely dipped in it. Opens steam boil it. Sets pressure of rollers and starts
valve to heat dye or chemical solution to machine to rotate cloth through water
required temperature. Starts machine. and rollers. Observes pressure gauges
Adjusts pressure on rollers and ensures periodically and maintains required
smooth flow of cloth through solution on pressure and temperature of water.
to roller at opposite side. Cleans and oils Drains off hot water by opening outlet tap
machine. May rinse dyed material and and lets its cold water to cool processed
pass it on to Drier for further processing. cloth. Collects processed cloth for
subsequent operations. Cleans and oils
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: machine.
Code 8154
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Machine Operators Code 8154
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
8154.2400 Machine Operators
Brushing Machine Man (Textile)
8154.2600
Brushing Machine Man (Textile) tends Sanforizing Machine Man
brushing machine for cleaning and
removing threads and foreign material Sanforizing Machine Man tends
from surface of untreated cloth sanforizing machine to shrink cloth to
preparatory to further processing. Sets maximum extent. Opens steam valve to
and adjusts roll of cloth, passes its end heat drying drums to required
through rollers of machine. Starts temperature, regulates speed of machine
machine and ensures that cloth is according to shrinkability of cloth and
properly brushed and passes through passes end of cloth length through guide
machine without damage. Cleans and oils rollers and damping, drying and stentering
machine. section of machine. Starts machine and
watches cloth as it is drawn through it
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ensuring that cloth is properly damped,
Code 8154 dried and stretched. Measures shrunk
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning cloth and reports shrinkage. Observes
Machine Operators gauges and adjusts machine where
necessary or as instructed. Cleans and oils
8154.2500 machine. May set feed rollers of required
diameter to get optimum shrinkage.
Crabbing Machine Man (Woollen
Textile)
VOLUME II B 409
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: to yarn drying machine and removes dried
Code 8154 yarn hanks coming out of machine. Back
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning Tender, Cloth Printing assists Printer in
Machine Operators preparing machine for new pattern
performing all heavy work, such as lifting
8154.2700 rolls of cloth and printing rollers into
place, making adjustments on printing
Singeing Machine Man/Singeing
rollers tightening nuts and screws, tending
Machine Operator
machine in operation, regulating cloth
tension screws, etc. Grey Cloth Tender
Singeing Machine Man; Singeing Man
Printing tends back-grey cloth, which is
(Textile) tends singeing machine to burn
run under the white cloth being printed in
fluff and rough protruding fibres on cloth
printing machine to act as foundation to
to get better finish. Adjusts cloth roll at
absorb any colour applied beyond edge of
feed-end of machine. Runs loose end of
white cloth.
cloth through guides and feeds it through
rollers. Lights burners in machine and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
regulates flow of gas to obtain desired
Code 8154
flame. Starts machine and observes cloth
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
as it runs over burner flames. Avoids
Machine Operators
scorching of cloth, ensuring burning of
fluff and unwanted threads and better
Family 8155
finish to it. Adjust machine where
necessary for creaseless flow and proper
Fur and Leather Preparing Machine
singeing of cloth. Cleans and oils machine.
Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8154 Fur and Leather Preparing Machine
Title Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning Operators operate and monitor various
Machine Operators machines that prepare leather or treat
fur-or wool-bearing pelts. They trim,
8154.9900 scrape, clean, tan, buff and dye animal
hides, pelts or skins to produce leather
Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning
stock and finished furs.
Machine Operators, Other
8155.0100
Bleaching, Dyeing, Printing and Finishing
De-Hairer, Machine/De-Hairer
Operatives perform variety of routine and
low skilled tasks in washing, bleaching, Machine Operator
dyeing, printing and finishing of textiles
and may be designated according to De-Hairer, Machine Operator removes
nature of work performed, such as: Piler; hair from hide or skin by stretching it
End puller piles cloth in kier or pulls end of through machine rollers fitted with blunt
cloth at washing or bleaching machine. spiral blades. Collects and keeps limed
Hydro-Extractor Attendant tends hydro- skins near machine for de-hairing. Places
extractor to extract water from cloth or skin or hide over lower roller of machine
yarn. Drying Machine Man, Woollen Yarn stretching it by hand to remove wrinkles;
feeds wet woollen or worsted yarn hanks starts machine to rotate upper roller of
VOLUME II B 410
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
machine fitted with blunt spiral blades; NSQF Level 4
operates foot pedal of machine to raise
lower roller of machine with skin on for ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
de-hairing; adjusts blunt spiral blades of Code 8155
upper rotating roller to shave or de-hair Title Fur and Leather Preparing
skin or hide; lowers roller and changes Machine Operators
position of skin for de-hairing remaining
portion of skin and repeats process till 8155.0300
entire skin is de-haired completely,
Scudder, Machine/Scudding
ensuring that skin is not damaged while
Machine Operator
de-hairing. May clean and repair machine.
May operate fleshing machine.
Scudder, Machine removes epidermis hair
roots, pigment cells and lime salts from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
grain side of hide or skin by passing it
Code 8155
through machine rollers fitted with blunt
Title Fur and Leather Preparing
blades. Collects de-haired and fleshed
Machine Operators
skins or hides and keeps them near
machine; spreads skin or hide with hair
8155.0201
side facing upwards on roller of machine
Flesher, Machine/Fleshing
and stretches it by hand to smooth out
Operator wrinkles; starts machine to rotate rollers
fitted with blunt knife blades; presses
Flesher, Machine; Fleshing Operator paddle to bring roller with hide against
removes flesh from skin or hide by passing sorting roller equipped with knife blade
it through machine rollers fitted with (scudding knife) to remove hair roots,
sharp blades, keeps de-haired skin over pigment cells etc.; reverses hide and
lower roller of machine, inner side turned repeats operation to scrape other half of
upwards; smoothens out wrinkles by hide; ensures that skin or hide is not
hand; starts machine to rotate machine damaged in process by knife cuts;
rollers; presses foot treadle of machine to removes de-haired skin from machine and
bring lower roller carrying hide, against places it near machine. May clean and oil
roller fitted with revolving knife blades; machine. May set machine with fresh
adjusts roller to scrape flesh particles knife blades.
from skin; feeds half of hide through
rollers; depresses pedal to rollers and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
removes hide; reverses hide and repeats Code 8155
operation to scrape other half of hide; Title Fur and Leather Preparing
ensures that skin or hide is not damaged Machine Operators
or cut by blades when scraping; piles
scrapped hides. May clean and oil 8155.0400
machine. May set machine with
Hide and Skin Setter,
appropriate cutters after grinding.
Machine/Setting Machine Operator
Qualification Pack Details:
Hide and Skin Setter, Machine; Leather
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q0601
Setter, Machine operates machine fitted
QP NOS Name Fleshing Operator
with blunt knife to set grains on hide or
VOLUME II B 411
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
skin and to smoothen leather. Spreads Splitting and Sammying Operator
leather stretched over machine table; (Leather)
starts machine and observes blunt edged
knife fitted in machine; rubs surface of
Splitting and Sammying Operator operates
hide or skin with pressure to set grains
the splitting machine to split the hide
and remove wrinkles; changes position of
horizontally into a grain layer/flesh layer.
leather to get entire surface of leather set
It can be done in the in the limed
by machine and to make it smooth. May
condition or in the tanned condition. A
oil and clean machine.
Sammying Operator operates the
sammying machine which absorbs the
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
grease and excess moisture from the hide
Code 8155 during the wet process in tanneries.
Title Fur and Leather Preparing
Machine Operators Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q0801
QP NOS Name Splitting and
8155.0500
Sammying Operator
Hide Splitter, Machine/Splitting NSQF Level 4
Machine Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Hide Splitter, Machine sets and operates Code
machine fitted with horizontal endless Title
belt type knife to split hide edgeways to
form two or more pieces or to give 8155.0601
uniform thickness. Starts machine and Hide Shaver, Machine/Shaving
adjusts thickness of cut; places hide on
Operator
machine table and smooths out wrinkles;
guides hide between machine rollers
Hide Shaver, Machine; Shaving Operator
which force edge of hide against machine
operates machine fitted with spirally fixed
knife; removes split hides from machine
knives to reduce thickness of hide or skin
or directs helper to do so; checks split
to uniform size. Places hide on machine
hide for accuracy and adjusts guides if
table with flesh side upward; starts
necessary; ensures that knife blade is
machine and presses foot pedal of
sharpened automatically by emery wheels
machine to raise table with leather on to
fixed to machine; adjusts emery stone
bring it closer to revolving wheel fitted
wheels if not in position for correct
with spirally fixed knives; holds skin or
sharpening of knife blade. May clean and
hide tightly as it is shaved by knives of
oil machine.
rotating wheel; changes position of
leather to shave rest of surface; checks
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
visually that shaving of leather is even and
Code 8155
to required thickness; ensures that emery
Title Fur and Leather Preparing
wheels fitted to machine sharpen knife
Machine Operators
blades automatically in process of
shaving; cleans and oils machine. May
8155.0501
repair machine.
VOLUME II B 412
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Qualification Pack Details: Leather Buffer, Machine; Buffing Machine
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q0301 Operator, Leather; Burnisher, Finishing
QP NOS Name Shaving Operator Wheel Operator tends machine that buffs
NSQF Level 4 hides to specified finish. Turns set screws
to regulate distance between rollers,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: according to thickness of hide; inserts hide
between rollers and starts machine; holds
Code 8155
half of hide while rollers buff surface of
Title Fur and Leather Preparing
other half; repeats buffing operation on
Machine Operators
unbuffed portion of hide. May be
designated according to hide buffed as
8155.0700
BLACK-LEATHER BUFFER; WHITE KID
Staker, Machine/Staking Machine
BUFFER. May tend machine equipped with
Operator
abrasive covered rollers that form nap on
surface of leather and be designated
Staker, Machine operates machine fitted SUEDING-WHEEL OPERATOR.
with movable arm with roller, which
moves backward and forward over edge Qualification Pack Details:
of blunt iron plate, to make conditioned
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q0201
hides soft and flexible. Conditions hides
QP NOS Name Buffing Operator
on previous day by keeping in moist saw
NSQF Level 4
dust; adjusts position or gap of iron plate
fitted to machine depending on type of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
hide used; starts machine and stretches
Code 8155
hide on edge of machine and feeds end of
Title Fur and Leather Preparing
hide into moving arm of machine between
Machine Operators
roller and metal plate; holds one end of
hide tightly by leaning heavily on hide
8155.0900
(using body weight for holding hide) as
Leather Glazer, Machine/Glazing
hide is being flexed by moving rollers over
blunt metal plate; changes position of Machine Operator
hide or inserts fresh area of hide into
rollers as moving arm comes forward to Leather Glazer, Machine; Glazing Machine
soften hide; keeps softened or flexed hide Operator glazes or gives glossy finish to
at central point. May oil and clean leather by operating glazing machine
machine. fitted with movable hard glass roller.
Positions leather on bed of machine and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: depresses pedal to lower hard glass roller
Code 8155 into leather; starts machine to move roller
Title Fur and Leather Preparing over leather; shifts position of leather
Machine Operators under roller to impart specified finish to
entire surface; pulls finished leather from
8155.0801 machine table and stacks it separately.
May treat surface of leather with oil
Leather Buffer, Machine/Buffing
before glazing depending on type of
Operator
leather.
VOLUME II B 413
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: prepare liming, deliming, pickling, and
Code 8155 tanning solutions used in treating hides or
Title Fur and Leather Preparing skins. Turns valve to transfer solutions to
Machine Operators drum during specified processing cycles.
Moves lever to activate drum that cleans,
8155.1000 washes, pickles, and tans hides or skins.
Replaces solid door of drum with
Rolling Machine Operator (Leather)
perforated door at specified intervals to
filter waste from drum at completion of
Rolling Machine Operator, Leather tends
cycles. Verifies salinity and temperature of
roller machine that smooths surface of
solutions, using salinometer and
leather by passing through moving rollers.
thermometer. Transfers tanning solution
Positions leather on bed of machine and
to drum and tans hides or skins.
depresses pedal to lower roller onto
leather; starts machine to move roller
Qualification Pack Details:
over leather; adds or removes counter
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q0701
weights to rollers depending on type of
QP NOS Name Drum Operator
leather and nature of rolling required;
NSQF Level 4
shifts position of leather under roller to
impart specified finish to entire surface.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
May be designated according to section of
hide rolled as BACK ROLLER; BELLY ROLLER Code 8155
or according to condition of leather rolled Title Fur and Leather Preparing
as DRY ROLLER; RETANNED-LEATHER Machine Operators
ROLLER; WET ROLLER.
8155.1102
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Post Tanning Machine Operator
Code 8155
Title Fur and Leather Preparing Post Tanning Machine Operator performs
Machine Operators the process of converting the crust leather
into finished leather. These operations
8155.1101 include softening of the crust, flattening it
Tanner, Rotary Drum, Continuous and finishing the surface of the
prefinished leather by pressing/embossing
Process (Leather Mfg.)/Drum
on it.
Operator
Qualification Pack Details:
Tanner, Rotary Drum, Continuous Process
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q0901
(Leather Mfg.); Drum Operator operates
QP NOS Name Post Tanning
rotary drum to remove hair and other
Machine Operator
soluble from hides or skins and convert
NSQF Level 4
hides or skins into leather or glue during
continuous process: Loads drum with
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
hides, skins, or other animal stock. Turns
Code 8155
valves to admit water and steam to drum.
Title Fur and Leather Preparing
Weighs and mixes specified amounts of
Machine Operators
lime, salt, and other chemicals in mixing
tank or drum, following formula, to
VOLUME II B 414
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8155.1200 8155.1202
Leather Measuring Machine Helper-Dry Operations (Finished
Man/Measuring Machine Operator Leather)
Leather Measuring Machine Man operates Helper-Dry Operations (Finished Leather)
machine to measure size of pieces of provides assistance in various processes of
leather. Sets machine indicators reading preparing finished leather such as in
at zero and inserts piece to be measured buffing, shaving, staking, toggling etc. An
into feed rolls of machine. Records area operator performs these functions and a
registered by indicator. May maintain Helper assists the operator and passes the
account of leather pieces measured. completed work onto the next stage in
production. They must have in-depth
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: knowledge and understanding of the
Code 8155 process of production, health and safety
Title Fur and Leather Preparing standards and quality parameters.
Machine Operators
Qualification Pack Details:
8155.1201 QP NOS Reference LSS/Q0101
Helper-Wet Operations QP NOS Name Helper-Dry
Operations
(Multiskilled)
(Finished Leather)
NSQF Level 2
Helper-Wet Operations (Multiskilled)
provides support in various processes of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
wet process operations in a tannery such
Code 8155
as preservation, soaking, liming, re-liming,
Title Fur and Leather Preparing
fleshing, de-liming, tanning etc. An
Machine Operators
operator performs these functions along
with an assistant and takes his support in
8155.1203
passing the completed work onto the next
stage in production. This position gives Helper-Finishing Operation
the helpers an opportunity to learn more (Finished Leather)
about the operation and work with/learn
from operators. Helper-Finishing Operation (Finished
Leather) provides support in various
Qualification Pack Details: finishing processes in a tannery such as in
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q0401 such as brushing, spraying, coating etc.
QP NOS Name Helper-Wet They assist the operator and pass the
Operations completed work onto the next stage in
(Multiskilled) production. This position gives the helpers
NSQF Level 2 an opportunity to learn more about the
operations and work with/learn from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: operators.
Code 8155 Qualification Pack Details:
Title Fur and Leather Preparing QP NOS Reference LSS/Q0501
Machine Operators
VOLUME II B 415
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
QP NOS Name Helper-Finishing lasted shoe-upper, smooth rough edges
Operation (Finished and even heads of nails. Removes, cuts,
Leather) off or drives in any protruding nails.
NSQF Level 2 Cleans and oils machine and requests any
needed repairs.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8155 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Fur and Leather Preparing Code 156
Machine Operators Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
Operators
8155.9900
Fur and Leather Preparing Machine 8156.0200
Operators, Other Heel Breaster, Machine (Foot-
Wear)/Machine Operator-Heel
Fur and Leather Preparing Machine Breasting
Operators, Other include workers who
operate and monitor various machines Heel Breaster, Machine (Footwear)
which prepare leather or treat fur or wool operates heel breaster machine to cut
bearing pelts not elsewhere classified. breast (forward part) of shoe-heel
according to style-specifications. Selects
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: knife and cutting block and sets knife of
Code 8155 required shape and size in machine.
Title Fur and Leather Preparing Adjusts cutting block and press plate on
Machine Operators machine. Collects heels and places one of
them on block. Presses foot pedal to bring
Family 8156 down knife over block. Presses foot pedal
to bring down knife over heel for cutting
its forward part. Ensures accurate cutting
Shoe Making and Related Machine
and repeats process for cutting breasts of
Operators
other heels. Stores them separately after
cutting. Cleans and oils machine and gets
Shoemaking and Related Machine
mechanical defects removed when
Operators operate and monitor machines
necessary.
which produce and repair standard or
special footwear, handbags and other
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
accessories, mainly made of leather.
Code 8156
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
8156.0100
Operators
Pounding Machine Operator (Foot-
Wear) 8156.0400
Heel Builder, Machine (Foot-
Pounding Machine Operator (Footwear) Wear)/Machine Operator-Heel
operates machine to pound (grind off)
Building
roughness from lasted shoe-uppers. Starts
machine. Holds and rotates shoe against
emery wheel to flatten lower edge of
VOLUME II B 416
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Heel Builder, Machine (Footwear) plate and removes rounded sole from
operates heel building machine to build machine. Checks rounding visually and
up shoe heel by gluing and nailing heel ensures desired accuracy. Cleans and oils
lifts (small leather pieces) together. Glues machine and gets defects removed if any.
heel lifts previously assembled by Heel May be designated according to type of
Assembler or collects and glues them by sole rounded such as INSOLE ROUNDING
hand. Places glued lifts one over another MACHINE OPERATOR, OUTSOLE
to build up heel to required size and ROUNDING MACHINE OPERATOR, etc.
height and retains them intact. Selects May operate improvised rounding
mould according to size of heel to be built. machine where opening of space for
Sets and adjusts it in machine. Puts nails insertion of sole and extent of rounding is
in die holes and places glued lifts in regulated by foot pedal and actual
mould. Presses foot pedal to start insertion and rounding is guided by hand.
machine which drives nails from die holes May set channelling knife in rounding
through lifts to hold them in position and machine for channelling of sole.
make complete heel. Takes out built heel
from mould and ensures proper nailing by ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
touch and sight. Cleans and oils machine Code 8156
and gets defects removed to keep it in Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
working condition. Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 8156.0600
Code 8156 Nailer, Machine/Machine
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
Operator, Nailing
Operators
8156.0500
Nailer, Machine; Nailing Machine
Sole Rounding Machine Operator
Operator; Tacking Machine Operator
(Footwear) operates footwear nailing
Sole Rounding Machine Operator machine to nail or tack shoe parts
operates sole rounding machine to trim together. Collects nails of required type
insoles and outsoles of shoe to required and size and checks them for sharpness of
shape and size. Collects master shape points. Fills them by hand in hopper of
wooden pattern of required size. Sets and nailing machine. Collects shoe parts to be
screws it in machine. Sets cutting knife nailed. Starts machine. Places or holds
and pressing plate in machine. Places sole shoe parts to be nailed under nailing head
on maker shape wooden pattern, of machine. Presses pedal to
operates hand wheel to lower pressing automatically release and drive nails
plate on top of sole to hold it firmly. Turns through shoe parts to be joined. Releases
guiding cam lever for positioning knife to pedal and takes out nailed pieces. Checks
cutting point. Depresses foot pedal to and ensures correct nailing by sight and
start machine and regulates movement of touch. Cleans and oils machine and gets
cutting knife to go round sole along edge defects removed when required to ensure
of pattern and cut it to required shape. proper functioning. Is designated
Releases foot pedal to stop machine and according to part of shoe nailed or tacked
turns lever to take off knife from sole. such as HEEL SEAT NAILER; TOP-LIFT
Reverses hand wheel to raise up pressing
VOLUME II B 417
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
NAILER; IN SOLE ATTACHER; INSIDE HEEL Leather Cutter, Machine (Harness and
ATTACHER, etc. Saddle Making) cuts leather by machine
for use in making harness and saddles. Fits
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: appropriate guide in machine and inserts
Code 8156 leather under knives to cut components to
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine desired shape. Checks sample piece for
Operators accuracy and continues production. May
sharpen and change knife occasionally.
8156.0701 May cut leather pieces using hand knife
(rapi).
Cutter, Machine/Cutter (Footwear)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Cutter, Machine, Clicker Machine; Press
Code 8156
Cutter (footwear) operates hand or foot-
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
press to cut footwear components from
Operators
sheets of leather. Selects and spreads on
table of machine leather of thickness and
8156.0900
quality appropriate to component to be
cut (heel, tongue, sole, toe-cap, etc.) Welt Sewer, Machine/Machine
Notes direction of stretch and any Operator, Welt Sewing
defective areas in leather. Plans cutting to
obtain maximum number of useable Welt Sewer, Machine; Welt Sewing
pieces. Places die on leather according to Machine Operator operates sewing
plan and operates hand or foot lever to machine to sew narrow strip of leather
force die through leather and cut out (welt) to lip of insole of shoe through
piece. Continues cutting until leather is upper and lining. Checks needle and awl
used up. Bundles cut pieces for removal. of machine and replaces them if they are
Oils and cleans machine and reports out of trim. Fixes spool of sewing cord in
defective operation for correction. May be box container and draws it through
designated as UPPER CUTTER, BOTTOM heated wax, guide and needle. Puts welt
CUTTER, LINE CUTTER, etc. according to in welt guide and depresses foot pedal to
component cut. start machine. Manipulates carriage of
shoe with both hands keeping sole
Qualification Pack Details: upward under needle, awl and welt guide
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q3201 to stitch through upper, lining and insole
QP NOS Name Cutter (Footwear) lip. Feeds thread and welt when
NSQF Level 4 necessary. Ensures decorative value of
welt as well as its proper stitching to hold
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: it intact with upper, lining and insole lip.
Code 8156 Cleans and oils machine and gets defects
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine removed. May sew extra welt if necessary.
Operators May sew welt manually using awl and
waxed cords.
8156.0800
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Leather Cutter, Machine
Code 8156
VOLUME II B 418
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine Qualification Pack Details:
Operators QP NOS Reference LSS/N3701
QP NOS Name Skiving Operator
8156.0901 NSQF Level 4
Stitching Operator (Footwear)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Stitching Operator (Footwear) performs Code 8156
stitching operations to the upper Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
components of the footwear as per the Operators
design instructions given by the designing
section. They should be able to stitch the 8156.1401
footwear with leather and non-leather Laster, Machine/Lasting Operator
components, using maximum accuracy.
They should be passionate about creating
Laster, Machine; Lasting Machine
intricate products without compromising
Operator operates machine to pull upper
on quality.
tightly over shoe last and tack sole upper
to insole. Pulls lining over last with hand
Qualification Pack Details:
pincers. Places shoe with sole upward
QP NOS Reference LSS/N3501 against guide of machine and below the
QP NOS Name Stitching Operator tack hammer. Presses pedal to start
(Footwear) machine and manipulates shoe to get
NSQF Level 4 upper permanently tacked along edges of
insole. Watches operation and ensures
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: proper tacking and shaping of shoe.
Code 8156 Cleans and oils machine and request
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine repairs when needed.
Operators
Qualification Pack Details:
8156.1001 QP NOS Reference LSS/N3801
Skiver, Machine/Skiving Operator QP NOS Name Lasting Operator
NSQF Level 4
Skiver, Machine (Footwear) skives (tapers)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
leather components of footwear on
machine for joining. Observes parts to be Code 8156
skived and estimates appropriate depth Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
and angle of skive. Adjusts screws on Operators
machines to set feed rolls and cutting
angle of knives. Inserts part between feed 8156.1500
rollers and depresses pedal to operate Sole Stitcher, Machine
knives. Matches skived parts and
occasionally adjusts angle or depth of cut Sole Stitcher, Machine; Sole Stitching
in order to obtain smooth joint without Machine Operator (Footwear) operates
ridge. Changes dull knives; cleans and oils sole stitching machine to attach outsole of
machine and reports malfunctioning for welt or upper and insole of shoe. Places
repairs. May join skived parts by gluing spool of sewing cord on stand of machine
and stitching. May do hand skiving. and draws cord through tension guide and
VOLUME II B 419
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
sewing needle. Sets bobbin in machine. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Adjusts machine for size, tension and Code 8156
number of stitches per inch. Sets shoe Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
with sole upwards on table rest of Operators
machine underneath needle and steps on
pedal to start machine. Guides shoe with 8156.1700
hand as needle sews around shanks
Splitter, Machine/Splitting
(waist) and forepart through outsole to
Machine Operator
upper surface of welt or insole. Stops
machine when sole is stitched and
Splitter, Machine; Sole Splitter; Bottom
removes show from machine. Ensures
Splitter; Splitting Machine Operator
that stitches are properly embedded in
(Footwear) operates splitting machine
channel, cut in outsole. Replaces broken
which shaves off rough or flesh side of
or defective needle and empty spool and
footwear components such as out-soles,
bobbins. Oils and cleans machine. May be
insoles, heal-lifts, welts etc. to required
designated according to type of machine
thickness. Examines components visually
on which worked such as BLAKE-SEWING
and decides amount of splitting required.
MACHINE OPERATOR LOCK-STITCHING-
Checks sharpness of splitting knife by sight
MACHINE OPERATOR OR DOUBLE-
and touch and adjusts it according to
STITCHING MACHINE OPERATOR.
thickness of component required.
Switches on machine. Feeds component
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
into feed rollers of machine to shave off
Code 8156
fleshy and rough stuff to get surface to
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
required thickness. Watches operation
Operators
and ensures accuracy in splitting. Places
split components manually in container.
8156.1600
Oils and cleans machine and gets defects
Seat Laster, Machine/Lasting
removed when required. May replace
Machine Operator blunt or damaged knife in machine.
Seat Laster, Machine; Seat Lasting ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Machine Operator (footwear) operates Code 8156
seat lasting machine to fasten upper heel Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
seat to insole. Operates hand wheel to set Operators
machine for size of last. Inserts last with
attached upper on heel-seat of machine
8156.1800
and heel part into seat-mould. Depresses
Heeler, Machine/Heel Attacher
pedal to raise heel seat to tacking
position. Starts machine which
Heeler, Machine; Heel Attacher, Machine;
automatically draws upper and lining
Heel Attaching Machine Operator nails
evenly over heel-seat and drives tacks to
leather and rubber heels to shoes by
fasten upper to insole. Removes last with
machine. Collects heels of proper size to
upper from heel-seat and examines for
be attached. Sets metal heel-mould of
correct shape and tacking. Cleans and oils
required size in machine. Collects nails of
machine and requests any needed repairs.
required size, examines them for
sharpness of points and feeds them into
VOLUME II B 420
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
heel mould. Sets and adjusts pressing Code 8156
plate and nail driver and ensures proper Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
functioning. Places shoe on mould and Operators
positions heel on shoe. Starts machine
which automatically drives nails through 8156.2000
heel and heel-seat and clinches them to Sole Leveller, Machine
insole. Removes shoe from mould and
checks accuracy of joining. Cleans and oils
Sole Leveller, Machine, Sole Levelling
machine and gets defects removed if any.
Machine Operator levels soles of shoe on
May attach heel by hand. May nail iron
sole levelling machine. Adjusts machine
tips in heel.
according to size of shoe to be levelled.
Places shoe on last stand of machine with
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sole upwards. Marks uneven portions of
Code 8156 surface of sole and levels it by beating
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine with hand hammer. Starts machine and
Operators rollers. Steps on foot pedal to raise hoe
and let moving rollers roll over its sole to
8156.1900 press and level it. Removes shoe from
Heel Compressor, Machine (Foot stand and ensures proper levelling. Cleans
Wear) and oils machine and gets defects
removed if any. May apply cement with
brush while levelling.
Heel Compressor, Machine (Footwear)
operates heel compressing machine to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
compress heels and increase their
durability. Selects top and bottom die of Code 8156
required shape and size and sets them in Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
machine. Determines amount of Operators
compression required and adjusts gauge
or bottom die accordingly to effect 8156.2100
required pressure. Collects and puts heel Trimmer, Machine
on bottom die fitted on machine table or
places them (heels) one by one on carrier Trimmer, Machine; Machine Trimmer
of machine which carries them under (Footwear) operates trimming machine to
compressing die. Switches on machine smoothen and trim various parts of shoe.
and presses foot pedal to bring top die on Examines parts of shoe by sight to
compressing die (bottom die) for pressing determine extent of trimming required.
and stretching heel to its full flexibility Sets proper cutting tool in holding disc of
(according to set pressure and shape in trimming machine. Switches on machine.
die) and stabilize durability. Checks Holds shoe with both hands and
thickness of compressed heels, sorts them manipulates edges to be trimmed against
according to sizes and ensures uniform revolving cutter to trim surplus portions
compression. Oils and cleans machine and and make surface even. Ensures accurate
gets defects removed as and when trimming to avoid damage to other parts
required. of shoe. Cleans and oils machine and gets
defects removed if any. May change and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: grind blunt tools. May operate scouring or
VOLUME II B 421
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
sand paper machine to give finishing burnishing iron and ensures stipulated
touches to various parts of shoe. May do performance of guides and roller. Sets
trimming by hand. skived edge of upper under iron against
guides, keeping edge of one piece over
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: other, guides upper under burnishing iron.
Code 8156 Regulates heating of burnishing iron by
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine pedal and ensures desired burnishing
Operators effect on edges of skived leather. Cleans
and oils machine and gets defects
8156.2200 removed if any.
Edge Setter, Machine
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8156
Edge Setter, Machine (Footwear) operates
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
edge-setting machine to polish edge of
Operators
sole of shoe for giving shape and desired
finish to it. Selects heating copet (iron)
8156.2400
according to thickness of sole and fits it in
machine holder. Turns on gas flame or Heel Padding Machine Operator
lights spirit-lamp fitted to machine. Turns
holder containing copet over gas flame or Heel Padding Machine Operator; Heel
spirit lamp as appropriate to heat it to Polisher polishes heel of shoe on heel
required temperature. Switches on padding machine. Switches on padding
machine. Holds shoe in both hands machine. Holds wax stick against heated
against revolving copet and manipulates roller of machine to get wax carried to
its (shoes) movement to burnish its entire pad or disc of machine. Holds shoe with
edge. Applies coating of wax with wax both hands and manipulates heel against
stick on burnished edge of sole. Repeats waxed pad for application of hot wax on it
process of burnishing after waxing to (heel). Presses heel with hands against
effect desired polish, shape and finish. revolving brush of machine to shine and
Cleans and oils machine and gets defects effect smooth finish. Cleans and oils
removed if any. May apply solution over machine and gets defects removed if any.
entire edge of sole to fill small holes.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 8156
Code 8156 Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine Operators
Operators
8156.2500
8156.2300 Eyeletting Machine Operator
Edge Burnisher
Eyeletting Machine Operator; Eye Letter;
Edge Burnisher; Edge Burnishing Machine Eyelet Setter; Grommet Machine
Operator; Edge Polisher (Footwear) Operator operates eyeletting machine
burnishes skived edges of leather uppers which punches holes and places eyelets in
of shoes by passing them through holes for lacing shoes. Collects
burnishing machine. Switches on to heat uneyeletted shoes and eyelets and sorts
VOLUME II B 422
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
them out according to size, shape, etc. Riveting Machine Operator; Sole Screwing
Fills machine hopper with required kind of Machine Operator (Footwear) operates
eyelets. Sets machine and adjusts eyelet riveting machine to screw brass screw
spacing plate. Places side of shoe upper to wire to sole of footwear. Collects spool
be eyeletted on machine die. Depresses (hollow cylinder for winding yearn or wire)
pedal to start machine which of brass screw wire. Opens spindle cover
automatically punches holes and fixes one and sets spool on it. Draws end of wire
eyelet in each hole. Removes eyeletted through nozzle, closes spindle cover and
shoe from machine die and checks for sets machine at high or low speed as
proper eyeletting. Cleans and oils machine required. Places shoe in horn of machine
and gets defects removed, if any. with sole upwards and starts machine.
Presses pedal to raise horn till sole
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: touches nozzle. Sets machine for feed and
Code 8156 speed of screwing. Guides shoe with both
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine hands and ensures screwing together of
Operators insole, middle sole and sole at desired
points. Replaces spool of screw wire as
8156.2501 necessary. Removes shoe from machine
and checks for proper screwing by touch
Pre-Assembly Operator
and sight. Cleans and oils machine and
gets defects removed.
Pre-Assembly Operator performs the
following operations: splitting, gimping,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ironing, marking, edge colouring, pasting,
Code 8156
folding and eyeletting. They should be
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
well versed with the sequential processes
Operators
involved in footwear manufacturing. They
should understand the importance of
8156.2601
quality within the footwear manufacturing
processes and ensure set standards are Helper – Bottom Making
achieved within the work area. (Footwear)
Qualification Pack Details: Helper–Bottom Making (Footwear)
QP NOS Reference LSS/N3601 provides assistance to the Footwear
QP NOS Name Pre-Assembly Machine Operators involved in material
Operator lasting, buffing, roughing, adhesive adding
NSQF Level 4 etc. They are required to co-ordinate with
team members and is required to assist
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: the operators to carry out activities based
Code 8156 on the production schedule.
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine
Operators Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q3301
8156.2600 QP NOS Name Helper – Bottom
Riveting Machine Operator Making (Footwear)
NSQF Level 2
VOLUME II B 423
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: QP NOS Name Helper – Finishing
Code 8156 (Footwear)
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine NSQF Level 2
Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8156.2602 Code 8156
Helper–Upper Making (Footwear) Title Shoe Making and Related
Machine Operators
Helper-Upper Making (Footwear) provides
assistance to the footwear machine 8156.9900
operators involved in material cutting, Cutting, Lasting and Sewing
insole building, stitching, skiving, etc. and Machine Operators, Other
carries out folding, adhesive adding and
edge colouring. They are required to co-
Cutting, Lasting and Sewing Machine
ordinate with team members and is
Operators, other perform variety of
required to assist the operators to carry
routine and low skilled tasks in
out activities based on the production
manufacture of shoes using appropriate
schedule.
machines or hand tools and may be
designated according to nature of work
Qualification Pack Details:
performed such as Crimping Machine
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q3101 Operator operates crimping machine to
QP NOS Name Helper – Upper give curved shape and wax finish to
Making (Footwear) stitches. Welt Cutter cuts welt from
NSQF Level 2 leather sheet using knife. Welt Grooving
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Machine Operator operates grooving
Code 8156 machine to cut groove in welt of shoe.
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine Channel Opener operates channel
Operators opening machine to slit sole of shoe for
stitching. Heel Assembler assembles heel
8156.2603 lifts for making heel. Last Assembler
Helper-Finishing (Footwear) assembles lasts and closed uppers of
appropriate size and shape as per
specification. Bottom Filler nails shank to
Helper-Finishing (Footwear) provides
insole at waist of shoe and fills bottom of
assistance to the footwear machine
shoe with sawdust, pieces of leather etc.
operators involved in footwear cleaning,
Upper Cleaner cleans upper of shoes with
polishing and buffing, final inspection and
water and brush and applies coating of
packing processes and carry out material
prima and dressing. Stitch Cutter cuts
lasting, buffing, roughing, adhesive adding
stitches on insole and sole evenly using
etc. They are required to co-ordinate with
hand knife. Edge Polisher, Hand polishes
team members and is required to assist
edges of footwear by applying chemical
the operators to carry out activities based
compound with brush. Decorating
on the production schedule.
Machine Operator (Footwear) operates
decorating machine for making decorative
Qualification Pack Details:
patterns on insole. Cementer (Footwear)
QP NOS Reference LSS/Q3401
applies cement glue by brush on footwear
VOLUME II B 424
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
components for sole pressing and to ends 8157.0200
of upper straps for pasting them on insole. Drying Machine Operator
Paster (Footwear) collects sole and
midsole from conveyor rack and pastes
Drying Machine Operator; Drying Tumbler
them together by pressing them with
Operator dries washed or dyed garments
hands.
by operating hand or electrically driven
drying-machine tumbler. Loads cleaned or
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
dyed articles into drum of drying machine.
Code 8156 Determines period of time for article to
Title Shoe Making and Related Machine remain in drum according to its nature
Operators and texture. Manipulates hand levers or
electric switches to start drum and electric
Family 8157 fan, and turns hand valves in steam pipes
Laundry Machine Operators that supply hot air to drum. Stops or
switches off machine and ensures that
articles are thoroughly dried and odour of
Laundry Machine Operators operate
cleaning fluid is removed. May operate
laundry, dry cleaning, pressing and fabric
extractor or washing machine.
treatment machines in laundries and dry
cleaning establishments.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8157
8157.0100
Title Laundry Machine Operators
Washing Machine Operator
8157.0300
Washing Machine Operator washes and
Dry Cleaner, Machine
cleans garments in power driven washing
machines. Places soiled articles in
Dry-Cleaner, Machine; Dry Cleaning
container of machine. Operates valve to
Machine Operator cleans and disinfects
fill machine with water to prescribed level
woollen and silken garments, textile
and adds soap and other cleaning agents
furnishings and other similar articles with
to water. Opens valves to admit steam
chemical solution or petroleum product
into machine to raise temperature of
by operating power-driven cleaning
water to and maintain it at desired
machine. Places articles in drum of
temperature. Operates controls to start
machine and fastens cover. Operates
rotation of container. Drains water from
valves to feed chemical solution into
machine and refills it as required to rinse
machine and operates controls to start
articles. Stops machine when articles are
rotation of drum allowing drum to rotate
washed, cleaned and rinsed and then
until articles are cleaned. Stops rotation of
removes them to drying machine for
drum and drains off solution. Opens
drying. May operate hydro-extracted
machine, removes articles from it for
machine to extract water out of wet
pressing by machine or ironing by Presser.
articles.
May periodically, filter dirty cleaning fluid.
May sort articles according to colour and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
condition and type of material. May
Code 8157
remove spots or stains by rubbing them
Title Laundry Machine Operators
VOLUME II B 425
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
with solvent. May examine dry-cleaned Family 8159
articles for any defect or damage.
Textile, Fur and Leather Products
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Machine Operators, Not Elsewhere
Code 8157
Classified
Title Laundry Machine Operators
This family covers Textile, Fur and Leather
8157.0400
Products Machine Operators not classified
Presser, Machine/Ironing Operator
elsewhere in the group 815, Textile, Fur
and Leather Products Machine Operators.
Presser, Machine operates pressing For instance, the family includes those
machine to smoothen and shape engaged in operating and monitoring
garments, textile furnishings and similar machines which make hats, tents,
articles. Lays garments or other material mattresses or miscellaneous articles such
on padded table of press. Pulls pressing as braids or other trimmings.
head of machine on to surface of material,
pressing head down ward into contact
8159.0100
with table and raises pressing head, re-
Folder, Machine/Folding Machine
arranges material and repeats process till
Operator
pressing is complete. May oil and clean
parts of machine. May press dry-cleaned Folder, Machine; Folding Machine Man
saris by wrapping them by hand on (Textile) tends machine that folds cloth
calendars (Wooden-roller frames) and be into measured lengths. Feeds cloth
designated as CALENDERER, SARIS. through machine rollers carefully to avoid
creases in folded cloth. Watches for and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: cuts out defective portions. Cuts cloth at
specified lengths and stack pieces. May be
Code 8157
designated as FRONT MACHINE FOLDER if
Title Laundry Machine Operators
working at receiving end of machine and
as BACK MACHINE FOLDER if working at
8157.0401
feeding end of machine.
Pressman
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8159
Pressman also called an ‘Ironer’ iron the
Title Textile, Fur and Leather Products
garment components and finished
Machine Operators Not Elsewhere
garments. The primary responsibility of a
Classified
pressman is to iron the garments and fold
it as per the customer specifications.
8159.0200
Splicing-Machine Operator,
Qualification Pack Details:
Automatic (Textile)
QP NOS Reference AMH/Q0401
QP NOS Name Pressman
NSQF Level 4 Splicing Machine Operator, Automatic
(Textile) tends machine that splices (joins)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ends of partially filled spools of tire cord
and winds cord from one spool to other:
Code 8157
Places spools of cord on machine spindles
Title Laundry Machine Operators
VOLUME II B 426
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
and pulls ends of cord through holding Code 8159
device under needle of sewing machine. Title Textile, Fur and Leather Products
Depresses pedal to start sewing machine Machine Operators Not Elsewhere
that automatically sews ends of cord Classified
together, cuts thread at end of sewing
cycle, and trims excess ends of cord. 8159.0400
Removes spliced ends from holding Press Operator
device. Pulls lever to start spindle that
winds spliced cord from one spool to
Press Operator tends machine that steams
another and to turn table, moving
and presses wrinkles from woollen cloth:
succeeding spindles into splicing position.
Starts press and manually guides cloth
Doffs full spools of cord as table turns
into machine and under weighted cylinder
complete circle. Mounts cones of thread
which steams material and presses out
on machine spindles, ties thread from
wrinkles. Turns hand wheel to adjust
spindle to thread in machine, and pulls
cylinder pressure according to type of
thread through machine guides, tension
cloth processed. Sews end of new
springs, and needle to thread sewing
material to end of material in press, using
machine.
sewing machine. Cleans and oils pressing
machine.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8159 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Textile, Fur and Leather Products
Code 8159
Machine Operators Not Elsewhere
Title Textile, Fur and Leather Products
Classified
Machine Operators Not Elsewhere
Classified
8159.0300
Balling-Machine Operator (Textile) 8159.9900
Leather Cutters, Lasters and Sewers
Balling Machine Operator (Textile) tends
and Related Machine Operators,
machines that wind thread, twine, or yarn
Other
into balls preparatory to shipping or
further processing. Places supply cones or
Leather Cutters, Lasters and Sewers and
spools on creel rack and threads yarn ends
Related Workers, Other include all other
through guides and tension device. Pushes
Leather Cutters, Lasters and Sewers and
core over spindle of machine or wraps end
Related Workers engaged in making fancy
of thread around shaping device of
or other leather articles by processes of
coreless winder. Pulls lever to start
cutting, lasting, sewing, shaping, etc., not
machine to wind specified amount of
elsewhere classified.
thread. Doffs balls of thread, using knife
to cut thread. Inspects balls for defective
winding or soiled thread. May insert labels
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
under the thread. May place ball on the
device to crush the centre and wrap end Code 8159
of thread around the centre as binder. Title Textile, Fur and Leather Products
May pack balls into boxes for shipment. Machine Operators Not Elsewhere
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Classified
VOLUME II B 427
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Group 816 devices. May drain out pasteurized milk
Food and Related Products into container through tap fitted in plant.
Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8160
Food and Related Machine Operators set,
Title Food and Related Products
operate and attend machinery used to
Machine Operators
slaughter animals, trim meat from
carcasses; bake, freeze, heat, crush, mix,
8160.0400
blend and otherwise process foodstuffs,
Mixing Tank Operator
beverages and tobacco leaves.
Occupations in this Group are classified Mixing Tank Operator tends mixing tank
into the following Families: to mix skimmed milk powder and water to
form toned milk. Opens taps to admit
specified quantity of water into tank as
8160 Food and Related Products
indicated by meter; measures required
Machine Operators
quantity of milk powder and adds it into
tank; switches on machine which churns
Family 8160
and mixes powder and water into milk;
Food and Related Products tests sample to ensure conformity to
Machine Operators specification, using testing apparatus;
empties tank, cleans and sterilizes
equipment.
Food and Related Machine Operators set,
operate and attend machinery used to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
slaughter animals, trim meat from
carcasses; bake, freeze, heat, crush, mix, Code 8160
blend and otherwise process foodstuffs, Title Food and Related Products
beverages and tobacco leaves. Machine Operators
8160.0500
8160.0300
Dairy Processing Equipment
Pasteurising Plant Operator (Dairy)
Operator
Pasteurising Plant Operator; Pasteuriser
(Dairy) operates pasteurizing plant to Dairy Processing Equipment Operator
remove harmful bacteria from raw milk operates continuous flow or vat-type
and other dairy products. Pumps cold raw equipment to process milk, cream, and
milk or other dairy products through a other dairy products, following specified
heating tank; maintains liquid at required methods and formulae: Connects pipes
temperature for a specified time and between vats and processing equipment.
pumps it through cooling unit into bottling Assembles fittings, valves, bowls, plates,
machine; checks thermometers and disks, impeller shaft, and other parts to
gauges and makes necessary adjustments equipment with wrench to prepare for
to ensure that liquid is properly operation. Turns valves to pump sterilizing
pasteurized; cleans and sterilizes tanks solution and rinse water through pipes
and inter-connecting pipes; disconnects and equipment and spray vats with
filter and renew or cleans straining atomiser. Starts pumps and equipment,
VOLUME II B 428
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
observes temperature and pressure obstructions by tapping clogged spouts
gauges, and opens valves on continuous with mallet and by adjusting gates;
flow equipment to force milk through examines product periodically by rubbing
centrifuge to separate cream from milk, sample between fingers or comparing it
through homogeniser to produce with colour and texture of standard
specified emulsion, and through filter to sample; keeps records of materials
remove sediment. Turns valves to admit received and products milled. May
steam and water into pipes to pasteurise supervise other workers at various stages
milk and to circulate refrigerant through of processing. May be designated
coils to cool milk. Starts pump and according to type of grains milled or
agitator, observes pressure and processed such as MILLER, RICE; MILLER,
temperature gauges, and opens valves on SPICES; MILLER, DAL; etc.
vat equipment to fill, stir, and steam-heat
milk in vat. Pumps or pours specified ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
amounts of liquid or powder ingredients, Code 8160
such as skim milk, lactic culture, stabilizer, Title Food and Related Products
neutraliser, and vitamins into vat to make Machine Operators
dairy products, such as buttermilk,
chocolate milk, or ice cream mix. Tests 8160.0800
product for acidity at various stages of
Husker, Machine (Food Grains)
processing. Records specified time,
temperature, pressure, and volume
Husker, Machine (Food grain); Hullerman,
readings.
Grain operates husking machine to
separate grain from its outer covering or
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
shell. Starts machine; pours grain into
Code 8160
storage bin attached to machine;
Title Food and Related Products
regulates feeding of grain into machine by
Machine Operators
manipulating lever: examines hulled grain
periodically for proper husking and adjusts
8160.0700
machine as necessary; switches off
Miller, Food Grains machine after completion of process or
when machine does not function properly;
Miller, Food grains processes rice, wheat, removes minor defects and reports major
pulses, spices and other food grains by defects to supervisor for rectification.
operating one or more machines or by Cleans and oils machine when not in use.
supervising their operations by other May keep production reports, may direct
workers. Adjusts and operates machines workers in storage of graded grain.
for removing husk or bran from grains,
polishing rice, grinding and crushing grain ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and spices into smaller pieces or powder, Code 8160
grinding, shifting and screening grains, Title Food and Related Products
flour or spices etc.; observes and Machine Operators
supervises milling process for desired
results, maintains flow of milled product 8160.0900
by regulating flow of ingredients in
Roller Man, (Food Grains)
specified proportion; removes
VOLUME II B 429
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Roller Man (Food grain) operates rolling Title Food and Related Products
machine to crush grain into flour. Adjusts Machine Operators
rollers according to fineness of grinding
required; starts machine and regulates 8160.1100
flow of grain from hopper to grinding Siever, Machine
rolls; observes crushing process keeping
grain moving at regular rate by tapping
Siever, Machine; Sieving Machine
clogged spouts with mallet (a wooden
Operator; Sifter, Machine (Food
hammer or one made of rubber or raw
Processing) tends battery of rotary or
hide) and by adjusting gates; examines
oscillating screens to separate and
product periodically by rubbing sample
remove bran or other foreign matter from
between fingers or by comparing texture
food grains, seeds, flour etc., or sort tea,
with those of standard sample; detects
coffee and other food grains by size. Fits
working defects if any of machine by sight
sieves of desired size into machine frame;
or sound; removes minor defects and
dumps product into hopper of machine;
reports major defects to supervisor for
places empty container at delivery end of
rectification. May clean roller machine
sieve; starts motor to activate screens;
and also roll flour.
opens hopper gate which automatically
allows product to pass through different
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sizes of sieves and removes bran, dust and
Code 8160 other foreign matter or sort product into
Title Food and Related Products different sizes; checks product passing
Machine Operators over different screens to prevent clogging
and overflow; removes and replaces
8160.1000 defective parts of damaged sieves. May
Flour Mill Operator wash grains with water.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Flour Mill Operator operates grinding
machine or mill to grind wheat, gram or Code 8160
other grains into flour or animal feed. Sets Title Food and Related Products
mill by adjusting roller according to Machine Operators
fineness of grinding desired; feeds grain
into feeding bin of mill by hand; observes 8160.1200
process, keeping grain moving at regular Oil Crusher Operator, Power
rate by tapping clogged spouts with
hammer and by adjusting gates; examines Oil Crusher Operator, Power operates
crushed product periodically by feel of crushing machine for extracting oil from
fingers and adjusts roller as necessary; seed such as cotton seed, castor seed,
removes flour collected in bag or copra and groundnut. Places empty
container at delivery end; cleans and oils container below crusher; starts machine
machinery. May weigh grain and flour, and feeds oil seeds into hopper of
calculate charges and collect payment of machine; sprinkles prescribed quantity of
services rendered to customers. May water over oil seeds to moisten them;
dress mill stones. turns hand wheel to adjust pressure
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: between rollers and ensures that oil is
Code 8160 properly extracted; examines oil cakes
VOLUME II B 430
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
visually or by touch to determine that operate one or more presses. May adjust
sufficient quantity of oil has been or repair equipment.
removed; removes container when filled
with oil at delivery end for further ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
processing and replaces it with empty Code 8160
one; take out oil cakes from hopper of Title Food and Related Products
crusher and fills hopper with fresh oils Machine Operators
seeds to maintain continuous production;
cleans and oils machine and keeps work 8160.1500
place clean and tidy. May specialize in
Wafer Baking Machine Operator
extraction of oil from, particular type of
(Baking)
seed. May operate animal driven
indigenous crusher for extracting oil from
Wafer Baking Machine Operator (Baking)
seeds. May operate filter crushed oil.
operates wafer-making machine for
moulding dough and baking it into wafers.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Fills hopper machine with dough; starts
Code 8160
machine and turns set screw to regulate
Title Food and Related Products
amount of dough deposited in mould;
Machine Operators
turns thermostat to adjust temperature of
moulds; observes colour of baked wafers
8160.1300
being ejected into conveyor to detect
Filter Press Operator (Oil)
defects; collects wafer sheets from
machine and places them on clean
Filter Press Operator (Oil) operates filter smooth table; joins them properly in rack;
presses to filter oil and remove mud and may tend machine which also rolls dough
other sediments. Covers filter plates with into shape of cones prior to baking and be
canvas cloth. Closes press, causing plates designated CONE BAKER, MACHINE. May
to come together forming seal, opens arrange cut wafer biscuits in wafer
valve to feed press with oil for filtering at stacking tray systematically.
required pressure by observing pressure
gauge of filter press; ensures that filtered ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
oil is collected at receiving end through
Code 8160
taps; inspects filtrate for clarity and draws
Title Food and Related Products
samples at various stages of filtering
Machine Operators
process for laboratory analysis; turns off
tap or cock if oil runs cloudy through taps;
8160.1600
stops pump or valve in case of leak
Cooker Operator
developing in press; cleans filtered
impurities and sediments from frames,
Cooker Operator; Crystallizer
screens and filters using water, steam, or
(Confectionery); Pan Attendant
compressed air; opens filter press,
(Confectionery) operates steam heated
dislodges solid materials from between
open pan or vacuum pan to cook glucose,
frames, and replaces filtering media;
sugar, milk, water and other ingredients
cleans and washes used filter cloth and
into syrup of required consistency for
dries them in sun before using again. May
making candies or sweets. Mixes sugar,
water, glucose, milk and other ingredients
VOLUME II B 431
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
in prescribed proportions according to MACHINE; MACHINE MAN, LOZENGES;
formula and pours mixture into cooking TOFFEE MACHINE MAN.
kettles, turns valves to admit steam and
sets pressure gauge and thermostats to ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
cook ingredients at specified temperature; Code 8160
stirs syrup occasionally while it is cooking, Title Food and Related Products
tests consistency of syrup with a Machine Operators
hydrometer; opens discharge valve and
starts pump or tilts cooker or kettle to 8160.1800
pour or dump syrups into heaters or onto
Chocolate Maker, Helper
cooling belts or tables. May beat or knead
confection to attain specified consistency
Chocolate Maker, Helper operates any of
as determined by colour and texture. May
following machines and equipment to
be designated according to type of
relieve regular operators engaged in
confectionery cooked as CRYSTAL SYRUP
processing cocoa beans into chocolate
MAKER (Confectionery); COCONUT
liquor and in producing cocoa powder and
COOKER (Confection) or equipment used
sweet chocolate, according to formula:
as VACUUM-COOKER OPERATOR
Controls roaster that roasts cocoa beans
(Confectionery).
to develop specified colour and flavour
and reduces moisture content of beans.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Tends mill to grind nibs (cracked cocoa
Code 8160
beans) into liquid chocolate of specified
Title Food and Related Products
fineness. Tends hydraulic press to extract
Machine Operators
cocoa butter from chocolate liquor, and
8160.1700
operates cocoa room machinery and
Cutting Machine Operator equipment to grind and pulverise cocoa
(Confectionery) cakes into cocoa powder. Mixes
ingredients, such as chocolate liquor,
Cutting Machine Operator sugar, and powdered milk to make sweet
(Confectionery); Candy Cutter, Machine chocolate. Operates refining machine to
operates machine for cutting candy into grind chocolate paste to specified
pieces or strips of desired shape and size. consistency. Operates tempering
Cuts slab of candy into sections, using equipment to control temperature of
knife; selects cutting dies, mounted on chocolate in cooling process before
shaft, according to specified width of cut, moulding. May tend moulding machines,
and installs cutting discs in machine; starts pressure cookers, and dryers. May assist
machine; feeds candy to machine through in supervising and training production line
sizing rollers for automatic formation, workers.
slicing and cutting into strips and pieces of
specified size and shape; weighs random ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
samples to ensure conformity of product Code 8160
with size and weight specifications; dusts Title Food and Related Products
candy with flour or starch to prevent Machine Operators
sticking; cleans machine and keeps place
tidy. May be designated according to 8160.1900
candy processed as CARAMEL CUTTER,
VOLUME II B 432
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Flake Miller, Wheat and Oats variation in drying procedure. Reports
(Grain-Feed Mills) chart deviations to Production Manager.
Records type of product, date, and time of
entry and discharge of product from
Flake Miller, Wheat and Oats (Grain Feed
drying chambers.
Mills) operates drier, huller, separator,
steel cutter, cooker, and flake roller
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machines to produce wheat and oats
flakes, according to specifications: Adjusts Code 8160
slides in chutes and turns valves to Title Food and Related Products
regulate flow of grain to machines. Machine Operators
Adjusts flow of air to dry grain and feels
grain to determine hulling capability. 8160.2200
Observes hulling process and adjusts Peeling Machine Operator (Food
speed of machines that remove and Canning and Preserving)
separate hulls from oats. Turns valves to
regulate temperature and moisture in
Peeling Machine Operator (Food Canning
cooker, and adjusts tension on flaking-
and Preserving) operates and feeds
machine rolls, according to hardness and
machine to remove skin from fruit and
size of grain.
vegetables preparatory to canning and
preserving. Checks preliminary washing
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and cleaning of fruits and vegetables by
Code 8160 hand; feeds product into hopper of
Title Food and Related Products machine; starts machine; checks at stages
Machine Operators peeling process; regulates flow of water
inside peeling tank; discharges product
8160.2000 through outlet valve on completion of
Noodle Press Operator peeling. May be designated according to
type of fruit or vegetables peeled such as
Noodle Press Operator operates machine APPLE PEELER; ONION PEELER.
to blend ingredients, and knead, extrude,
and cut dough used to make noodles: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Installs specified die in press, using hand Code 8160
tools. Adjusts press rollers to regulate Title Food and Related Products
thickness of dough, using micrometre and Machine Operators
hand tool. Dumps premeasured quantity
of eggs into tub, sets meter, and turns 8160.2300
spigot to admit prescribed amount of Pitting Machine Operator (Food
water. Starts beater to mix eggs and water
Canning and Preserving)
for specified time. Starts pump s to
transfer mixture to mixing unit of press.
Pitting Machine Operator (Food Canning
Opens hopper to admit flour into mixing
and Preserving) operates and feeds
unit and starts press to process mixture.
machine to remove pits, seeds or stones
Turns screw to set speed of knives to cut
from fruits preparatory to canning and
product to specified length. Patrols drying
preserving. Feeds fruits by hand into
chambers and observes temperature and
hopper of machine; starts machine;
humidity readings recorded on charts for
observes revolving of drum containing
VOLUME II B 433
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
fruits, stoppage of drum when unpitted Seaming Machine Operator (Food Canning
fruit positions pitting knives, peering of and Preserving); Can-Sealer Operator
knives in between fruits to remove pits, seams tops or bottoms on metal
seeds or stone; examines product containers to form open-top cans or to
periodically to ensure that process is close filled cans by feeding and tending
proceeding correctly. Stops machine when automatic double seaming machine.
process is complete and removes product. Loads feed hopper of machine with tin-
May be designated according to product can ends (tops or bottoms); starts
pitted as CHERRY PITTING MACHINE machine; observes machine operations as
OPERATOR; APPLE PITTING MACHINE can shells or filled cans enter machine in
OPERATOR. upright position by conveyor and are
automatically closed to ascertain that cans
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and ends are properly joined and seamed
Code 8160 together; stops and clears machine when
Title Food and Related Products jams occur. May oil and make minor
Machine Operators repairs to machine. May make
adjustments to mechanism to
8160.2400 accommodate various sizes of containers.
Fruit Press Operator (Food Canning
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and Preserving)
Code 8160
Title Food and Related Products
Fruit Press Operator (Food Canning and
Machine Operators
Preserving) sets and operates power press
for extracting juice from fruits for canning
8160.2600
and preserving. Places frame equipped
Retort Operator (Food Canning and
with filter cloth on press cart; pulls lever
or turns valve to release fruit from hopper Preserving)
or pipe line onto filter cloth; spreads fruits
evenly over filter, folds corners of cloth to Retort Operator; Cooker, Pressure (Food
cover fruit, and removes forming frame; Canning and Preserving) controls retort
pushes cart loaded with fruit into press; chamber (steam pressure cooker) to cook
starts press; pulls cart from press and canned foods according to specifications.
dumps fruit pulp into container. May start Pushes trucks or lowers baskets of canned
pump to transfer juice to storage tanks. foods into chamber of retort, using hoist;
May work on fruit reaming machine or closes retort door or lid to seal chamber;
pulping machine and be designated observes dials and thermometers, and
accordingly. turns valves to admit steam to retort and
to control temperature, pressure, and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: cooking time; turns valves to release
Code 8160 steam and admit cooling water into
Title Food and Related Products chamber to prevent overcooking at end of
Machine Operators cooking cycle. May open retort and move
basket of canned food for cooling trough,
8160.2500 using hoist.
Seaming Machine Operator (Food
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Canning and Preserving)
VOLUME II B 434
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Code 8160 eliminate air, and sterilize syrup; tests
Title Food and Related Products syrup for sugar content, using
Machine Operators hydrometer; pumps syrup to storage tank.
8160.2700 May filter syrup to remove impurities and
Processing Man (Food Canning and be designated as SYRUP FILTERER. May
blend raw syrups and be designated as
Preserving)
SYRUP BLENDER.
Processing Man (Food Canning and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Preserving) heats containers of canned or
Code 8160
preserved foods to sterilise their contents,
Title Food and Related Products
by means of hot water vats, troughs, or
Machine Operators
retorts. Fills vats or troughs with hot
water; heats water to required
8160.2900
temperature by steam or gas; loads
material by hand or mechanical hoists; Exhaust Box Operator (Food
keeps seamed cans for a specified time in Canning and Preserving)
hot chest; removes sterilized seamed cans
from chest box and cools processed cans Exhaust Box Operator (Food Canning and
in retort, injecting compressed air to Preserving) removes or expels air from
counteract pressure within cans. May fruit tissues and containers by placing and
clean sterilising chambers at regular keeping them immersed in hot water bath
intervals. or steam chest for specified period. Places
filled caps with top open on conveyor
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: belt; starts exhaust box; regulates speed
Code 8160 of conveyor to allow cans to pass through
Title Food and Related Products steam filled channel for a specified time;
Machine Operators admits steam into exhaust box to raise
temperature to heat can to expel air from
8160.2800 fruit tissues; stops and clears machine
Panman (Food Canning and when jams occur. May oil and clean
machine.
Preserving)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Panman (Food Canning and Preserving);
Code 8160
Cooker syrup; Syrupman tends equipment
Title Food and Related Products
to mix ingredients that produce syrups
Machine Operators
used in canned fruits and preserves,
flavourings, frozen novelty confections, or
8160.3000
non-alcoholic beverages. Determines
amounts of ingredients, such as sugar, Foodstuff Freezer
water, and flavouring, required for
specified quantity of syrup of designated Foodstuff Freezer freezes fruits,
specific gravity; opens valve to admit vegetables and other foods before or after
liquid sugar and water into mixer; adds packing. Places prepared food or cartons
flavouring ingredients and starts mixer to of food on shelves or on moving belt in
make syrup; opens valve to admit steam freezing unit. Regulates temperature and
into jacket of mixer to invert sugar, freezing time. May remove frozen food.
VOLUME II B 435
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Pulls cart from heating chamber. May
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: record drying time of each load.
Code 8160
Title Food and Related Products ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Machine Operators Code 8160
Title Food and Related Products
8160.3100 Machine Operators
Peanut Blancher 8160.3300
Refining-Machine Operator (Oil
Peanut Blancher tends blanching machine and Grease)
that removes skins from shelled peanuts:
Starts machine and pours peanuts into Refining Machine Operator (Oils and
machine hopper. Inspects peanuts as they Grease) tends machine that refines crude
fall from machine onto moving belt and oils, such as soya bean, cottonseed, and
picks out foreign matter, unblanched peanut: Turns valve to pump oil and
peanuts, and peanuts that fail to meet caustic solution from storage tanks into
production specifications. May sack machine tanks as specified. Starts
blanched peanuts. May tend sorting machine to separate caustic from oil by
machine that electronically locates and centrifugal force. Sets thermostat,
removes unblanched peanuts. observes gauges, and regulates valves to
maintain prescribed temperature in wash
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and dryer tanks. Turns valves to pump
Code 8160 mixtures to wash and dryer tank to
Title Food and Related Products remove by-products with water, and
Machine Operators impurities with heat. Turns valve to pump
refined oil to storage tanks. Cleans bowls,
8160.3200 using water and steam. May test samples
Dehydrator Tender (Canning and of crude and refined oil to determine
specific gravity and free fatty acid content,
Preservation)
using hydrometer and refractometer.
Dehydrator Tender (Canning and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Preservation) tends sulphur and drying
Code 8160
chambers to bleach and dehydrate fruit:
Title Food and Related Products
Starts conveyors to load trays with fruit,
Machine Operators
and levels fruit in trays to ensure
thorough processing. Pushes loaded cart
8160.3400
into sulfurizing chamber and lights burner
to generate fumes. Moves cart from Crusher Operator, Sugarcane
sulfurizing chamber into drying chamber
to dehydrate fruit. Observes gauges, and Crusher Operator, Sugarcane; Mill House
regulates and maintains specified Foreman; Mill House In Charge Fitter; Mill
temperature and humidity in drying House Head Fitter; Mill House Head
chambers. Feels and observes fruit during Worker sets and operates power driven
dehydrating process to ascertain firmness roll pressure to extract juice from
and colour in accordance with standards. sugarcane for making sugar, Gur and
khandsari sugar. Receives instructions and
VOLUME II B 436
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
sets roll pressure according to type of plates and floor cleaned and washed for
sugarcane to extract maximum possible next filtration. May be designated as
amount of juice without damaging rollers ROTARY FILTER OPERATOR, if operates
or machinery; watches cane crushing power driven rotary filter having
operations both by sight and sound; perforated drum to separate mud and
directs rate and speed of crushing other sediments from juice, by admitting
according to load; mixing of juice from muddy juice into tank of machine and
subsequent set of rollers to previous one rotating drum through which juice is
and bagasse removal. Attends to oiling sucked while mud sticks to drum and is
and cleaning of rollers and major and subsequently scraped off by knife or blade
minor repairs, and conducts overhauling attached to machine.
and major repairs during off-season. May
be designated as KOHLU OPERATOR, if ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
operates and feeds animal driven Code 8160
sugarcane crusher for extracting juice. Title Food and Related Products
Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8160 8160.3600
Title Food and Related Products Dorr Clarifier Operator
Machine Operators
Dorr Clarifier Operator; Batch Attendant;
8160.3500
Dorr Subsider Attendant; Dorr Clarifier
Filter Pressman Attendant operates clarifier which settles
mixture of juice, lime and super
Filter Press Man; Filter Press Operator; phosphate heated to determined
Assistant. Press Man; Filter Press Mate; temperature for clarifying juice. Boils
Press mate (Sugar) operates filter press to mixture of juice and lime to prescribed
filter mud and other sediments from temperature in subsider unit; collects
sugarcane juice preparatory to further samples of juice in test tubes by turning
processing for making sugar. Covers filter test cocks of overflow pipe, observes
plates with cloth or canvass and tightens them against light to ascertain clarity of
hand screw to close press; dries filter juice before letting out to evaporators, or
cloth, if necessary, by operating valve and takes samples of juice periodically to
passing steam into press; opens and check quality of clarification using BTB
regulates valve for juice to be pumped (Bromo-Thymal Blue) Paper; manipulates
into press till specified pressure is valves to let out juice from different
indicated on gauge fitted to pump; compartments of Dorr, opens bottom
watches flow of filtered juice into cocks, checks sample and ensures mud
receiving channel, and directs juice to level is not above prescribed limit;
another press, when flow of filtered juice examines consistency of mud and
gets clogged. Washes mud on filter cloth regulates it draining out from unit. Drains
by opening hot water valve; opens steam out mud from subsider to mud tank, as
valve to pass steam into filter cloth for necessary, and cleans mud deposited in
drying mud cake; opens press and gets tank once in each shift; pours heavy oil
mud scraped off filter cloth, uses filter once every week over surface of juice in
press cloth washed for re-use, and filter subsider to prevent vapour escaping.
VOLUME II B 437
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Ensures efficient working of different ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
compartments and components of unit. Code 8160
May guide Evaporator Operator in co- Title Food and Related Products
ordinating supply of decanted juice from Machine Operators
Dorr into evaporator.
8160.3800
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Pan Man, Sugar
Code 8160
Title Food and Related Products
Pan Man, Sugar operates vacuum pans to
Machine Operators
further boil syrup received from
evaporators till syrup has crystallized to
8160.3700
proper point. Creates vacuum in pan by
Evaporator Operator, Sugar steam ejector; operates intake valve to fill
pan to proper level with syrup from
Evaporator Operator, Sugar; Evaporator evaporators; opens exhaust or live steam
Attendant boils sugarcane juice in valve to let into pan hot steam to boil
evaporators to evaporate excess water till syrup to required density till it runs into
syrup of specified consistency is obtained massecuite (thick mixture of crystals and
preparatory to further processing in syrup); keeps watch on and regulates
manufacture of sugar. Operates valves to temperature; pressure gauge etc. to
admit juice in evaporator up to prescribed maintain correct boiling pressure;
level; starts vacuum pump to create examines sample periodically, on clean
vacuum and admits exhaust steam into glass slide to check visually against light or
evaporator for heating juice to boiling to feel by touch to determine if crystals
point; watches and regulates have formed, as desired; takes in further
temperature, pressure gauges, as seed i.e., grains of required size, obtained
necessary; transfers boiling juice from one from earlier operation, more water to thin
evaporator to another, by operating juice or syrup and re-boils, if necessary, to
valves, to re-boil juice in each evaporator make specific type of massecuite;
for forming syrup of required consistency; manipulates levers and valves to break
checks frequently samples of syrup drawn the vacuum and shut steam; opens slide
from last evaporator, using hydrometer; valve to drop massecuite into crystallisers
repeats the process till syrup of required below. May distribute or transfer syrup
consistency is formed; releases syrup for containing grains to other pans as
storage in tank for further processing. required for making specific type of
Ensures against air leakage in line to massecuite. May clean pan with steam.
prevent disturbance in boiling; keeps May be designated as HEAD PAN MAN, OR
record of data relating to working of PAN IN CHARGE, if engaged on
evaporators. May use live steam if supervision of pan station; or ASSISTANT
temperature of exhaust steam falls PAN MAN, if employed to assist Pan Man.
considerably. May attend to more than
one evaporator and be designate as ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
TRIPPLEMAN, QUAD/QUADRUPLE MAN, Code 8160
etc., according to number of evaporators Title Food and Related Products
operated. Machine Operators
VOLUME II B 438
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8160.3900 syrup or molasses from crystals which
Crystallizer Man adhere to walls of container; sprays water
with hose or manipulates valve for
automatic spray to wash sugar once or
Crystallizer Man; Crystallizer Operator,
twice during operation for developing
Sugar; Crystalliser Attendant; Pan Floor
massecuite; pulls lever, stops machine and
Worker, Crystallizer Mazdoor tends
scrapes off sugar from walls of centrifugal
crystalliser tank to cool boiling massecuite
container by wooden scraper,
received from pans for developing into
manipulating worm and worm shaft;
sugar crystals. Operates valves and pulls
drops scraped off sugar into magma mixer
trap doors to allow required quantity of
or conveyor according to type of
boiling massecuite into crystalliser tank
massecuite operated. May manually feed
through open sheet metal channels, called
massecuite into centrifugal machine.
gutters; starts stirrers in tank and admits
and adjusts flow of cooling water in coils
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
around tank to prevent solidification of
massecuite and to ensure its cooling Code 8160
evenly and at controlled rate; stops Title Food and Related Products
machine when required state of Machine Operators
crystallisation has been obtained; opens
trap doors and drains off massecuite from 8160.4100
crystalliser for pumping to centrifugal Magmaman
machine after specified cooling; cleans
and washes gutters, trap doors etc. with Magma Man; Magma Mixture Attendant;
water after delivery of massecuite. May Magma Operator; Magma Mazdoor
add powdered sugar to massecuite to prepares magma (solution) from sugar of
induce crystallisation. massacuites by adding water, syrup and
molasses and by mechanically stirring for
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: re-processing. Receives sugar extracted
Code 8160 from different massacuites into mixing
Title Food and Related Products tank; operates lever and starts its
Machine Operators mechanical stirrer; opens valves and adds
hot or cold water and sulphurated syrup
8160.4000 with sugar in tank, as necessary, for
Centrifugal Man making required type of magma; ensures
thorough mixing; operates steam pumps
and delivers magma to pan station,
Centrifugal Man; Centrifugal Operator;
sulphitation tank, or seed mixer, as
Centrifugal Machine Man; Centrifugal
specified, for re-processing.
Mate operates centrifugal machine for
separating sugar crystals from massecuite.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Switches on motor; operates lever to
lower delivery channel; admits required Code 8160
quantity of massecuite pumped from Title Food and Related Products
crystalliser into container of centrifugal Machine Operators
machine; closes sliding top covers of
centrifuge, allows it to develop speed and 8160.4200
spin massecuite at high speed separating Cutter Driver
VOLUME II B 439
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Cutter Driver; Knife Engine Driver; Engine Raw Juice Tank Pump Attendant; Juice
Driver Knife; Motor Attendant, Knife Pump Man regulates flow of juice from
operates electrically or steam driven high mill house to top tank by operating and
speed knife engine cutter to size in- adjusting valves of juice pipe line.
coming sugar-cane and to transmit sized Watches flow of raw juice to top tank and
sugarcane by elevator to mill house for controls flow by opening or closing valves;
extracting juice. Switches on motor to closes and stops pump valve when top
operate cutter; signals Cane Carrier Driver tank gets filled; collects juice samples for
to operate cane carrier; watches load on laboratory tests; cleans empty raw juice
cane carrier to avoid jamming or breaking tank periodically; lubricates maceration
of cutter blades; stops cutter, when and mixed juice pumps.
necessary, by operating valves; changes
cutter blades and does minor repairs ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
periodically, and during stoppages, if Code 8160
necessary. May attend to lubrication of Title Food and Related Products
engine, look after machine, and assist in Machine Operators
repair and overhauling of cutter.
8160.4500
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Juice Measuring Man
Code 8160
Title Food and Related Products
Juice Measuring Man; Raw Juice
Machine Operators
Measuring Tank Man; Juice Weighing
Man; Juice Weighing Attendant measures
8160.4300
or weighs and records weight of,
Cane Carrier Driver, Mill House sugarcane juice received from mill house
by automatic weighing and recording
Cane Carrier Driver, Mill House; Carrier machine for calculating sugar recovery.
Driver Sugar operates power driven mill Watches automatic filling of juice pumped
house cane carrier to feed sugarcane into from fill house into weighing tanks and
mill house rollers. Starts mill house cane records readings of automatic recording
carrier and regulates its speed by instruments, tabulates weight of juice
regulator or clutch wheel to prevent extra from recorded readings, and maintains
load and choking; removes jamming of registers showing number of times tanks
sugar-cane in first rollers; gets speed of filled, indicating data also on black board
crushing mill and cane conveyor regulated for ready information; collects samples of
to suit ultimate feeding into rollers. May mixed juice from every tank for analysis
attend to repair and overhauling of cane and arranges for addition of super
carriers. sulphate to mixed juice, if necessary;
checks up tare weight frequently; supplies
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: account of juice received to various
Code 8160 officers, as scheduled. May operate
Title Food and Related Products valves, in absence of automatic
Machine Operators arrangement, to fill measuring tanks with
raw juice.
8160.4400
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Raw Juice Tank Pump Attendant
VOLUME II B 440
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Code 8160 by guarding against leakage from cover,
Title Food and Related Products walls and tubes of juice heaters; informs
Machine Operators shift Chemist in case of leakage or other
defect. Gets tubes, cylinders and other
8160.4600 parts of heaters cleaned by Juice Heater
Lime Juice Tank Attendant Helper. May use live steam if temperature
of exhaust steam falls below prescribed
limits. May direct removal of hot juice in
Lime Juice Tank Attendant; Milk of Lime
buckets in case of pump failure. May
Tank Attendant; Lime Attendant supplies
conduct periodical repair and over-hauling
juice by operating valves, from milk of
of heaters.
lime tank to juice heater for mixing it
further with raw cane juice for boiling.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Ensures that milk of lime tank is full;
opens valves by hand and watches flow of Code 8160
milk of lime into juice heater; controls Title Food and Related Products
pumping rate to prevent overflow of milk Machine Operators
of lime tank and to give steady supply of
milk of lime into juice heater; opens valve 8160.4800
to fill juice heater with raw cane juice Juice Heater Helper
from top tank; watches level of mixed
juice in juice heater and closes inlet valve Juice Heater Helper; Juice Heater Cleaner
when prescribed level is attained. May cleans juice heaters and assists juice
add prescribed quantity of milk of lime Heater man in operating heaters for
and sulphur dioxide to raw cane juice. heating juice in sugar manufacture. Opens
and adjusts valves as directed by Juice
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Heater Man and admits raw juice, into
Code 8160 tubes or cylinders of juice heater; assists
Title Food and Related Products in maintaining constant specified steam
Machine Operators pressure during heating; lifts heater top
cover, removes left-over juice and cleans
8160.4700 periodically tubes, cylinders and other
Juice Heater Man parts of heaters, using portable power
driven or hand brush, cleaning rod, water,
etc. Gets the juice heater emptied by
Juice Heater Man; Juice Heater Attendant
carrying hot juice in buckets in case of
heats raw juice by steam to required
leakage of tubes or breakdown of heater.
temperature in tubular or cylindrical juice
May assist in letting in live steam in juice
heaters for further processing. Receives
heater and in repair and overhaul of
juice into tubes or cylinders of juice heater
heaters.
by opening or directing opening of inlet
valve; heats juice to required degree of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
temperature by opening steam valve and
letting in exhaust steam inside heater; Code 8160
maintains constant pressure by regulating Title Food and Related Products
pressure gauge and steam valve. Prevents Machine Operators
inter-mixing of raw juice and sulphitated
juice and leakage of juice into condensers 8160.4900
VOLUME II B 441
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Carbonation Man watching overflow pipe, opens pump line
valve to pump off juice to filter press at
Carbonation Man; Carbonation Mate; First desired speed; cleans tank strainer
Carbonation Man; Lining Man tends frequently to maintain easy flow of juice
carbonation tanks to purify sugarcane in pumping. May regulate flow of juice in
juice by mixing heated juice with milk of bottom tank and operate pump, if
lime and carbon dioxide with a view to necessary. May be designated as
precipitating mud and impurities from it. FIRST/SECOND CARBONATION STORAGE
Admits heated juice in first carbonation TANK ATTENDANT if engaged on first or
tank up to overflow-pipe level; admits and second carbonation tank.
controls flow of prescribed quantity of
milk of lime into juice; lets in continuous ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
flow of carbon dioxide and allows Code 8160
ingredients to mix thoroughly; tests Title Food and Related Products
solution with testing paper to determine Machine Operators
sufficiency of ingredients; makes
adjustments to ensure correct 8160.5100
composition of mixture, if necessary; Sulphitation Man, Sugar
discharges the carbonated juice into
storage tank for onward pumping to filter
Sulphitation Man, Sugar; Sulphitation
press. May get pipe line, tank and other
Tank Attendant; Sulphitation Tank Mate
equipment repaired or overhauled. May
tends sulphitation tank for passing sulphur
be designated as SECOND CARBONATION
dioxide into filtered juice to further clarify
MAN, if engaged on passing and adjusting
and bleach it before further processing.
flow of carbon dioxide into juice flowing
Operates valve to let in juice, after
into second carbonation tank after first
filtration, into sulphitation tank up to
filtration, testing solution with testing
prescribed level; tests specific gravity, if
paper, and allowing juice to flow off for
required, with hydrometer; manipulates
second heating.
valves to admit required quantity of milk
of lime and sulphur dioxide into tank and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
allows it to be mixed with juice, takes out
Code 8160 samples of mixed juice frequently and
Title Food and Related Products tests it with indicator (BTB) paper to
Machine Operators determine sufficiency of lime and sulphur,
adding needed ingredients, where
8160.5000 necessary. Conducts second sulphitation,
Carbonation Storage Tank in similar manner, by taking in syrup,
Attendant instead of juice, coming in from
evaporators, by passing sulphur dioxide to
clarify it and by taking out samples in test
Carbonation Storage Tank Attendant;
tubes to test with BTB paper. Opens
Carbonation Juice Pump Attendant tends
delivery valve to pump out sulphurated
carbonated storage tank and arranges
juice or syrup to storage tank or clarifier
pumping of carbonated juice to filter
through juice heater. Conducts periodical
press. Ensures filling of carbonated juice in
cleaning and checking of tank equipment
main storage tank and filling of bottom
and pipe line to maintain it in proper
tank from it, by operating tap or valve and
VOLUME II B 442
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
working condition. May be designated as sediments. Receives juice/syrup from
SULPHITATION MAN, (JUICE) if engaged eliminators into settling tank and allows it
on (first) sulphitation of juice; or to remain in tank for specified period to
SULPHITATION MAN, SYRUP, if engaged let mud and other sediments settle down
on (second) sulphitation of syrup. at bottom; opens valve to allow clear
juice/syrup to flow out for further
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: processing, lets out muddy juice/syrup for
Code 8160 further filtering. Cleans and washes tanks
Title Food and Related Products assisted by operatives.
Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8160.5200 Code 8160
Eliminator Attendant, Sugar Title Food and Related Products
Machine Operators
Eliminator Attendant, Sugar; Eliminator
8160.5400
Mate boils sulphurized juice or syrup
received after sulphitation to remove Works Poor Attendant
certain impurities. Opens valve to let in
juice or syrup into tank up to prescribed Works Poor Attendant tends works poor
level; opens steam valve to heat coils and machine to cool massacuite to required
boil juice or syrup by maintaining temperature before being pumped to
temperature of juice or syrup at specified respective centrifugal machine for
level; checks periodically temperature of separating sugar crystals. Opens valve
juice/syrup with thermometer; closes from crystalliser and allows massacuite to
steam valve after boiling for prescribed flow into works poor machine up to
period; operates valve to discharge boiled prescribed level; presses hand lever to
juice or syrup into settling tanks; opens start stirrers in machine; checks and
bottom valve of tank to drain off ensures running of cold water through
sediments to another tank; takes samples tubes inside machine; prevents
of clean juice/syrup in test tubes to check solidification of massacuite by diluting
it for desired clarity May be designated as with water, if necessary; regulates flow of
SULPHURATED SYRUP TANK ATTENDANT massacuite from works poor into pump
OR SYRUP HEATER ATTENDANT if engaged feeding centrifugal machine.
on boiling and clarifying syrup.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8160 Code 8160
Title Food and Related Products Title Food and Related Products
Machine Operators Machine Operators
8160.5300 8160.5500
Settling Tank Man, Sugar Gur Maker
Settling Tank Man (Sugar); Settling Tank Gur Maker makes 'gur' from juice of
Attendant; Clarifier Attendant, Sugar sugarcane, palm, etc. Sieves raw
attends to settling tanks to separate sugar sugarcane or palm juice to clean
cane juice/syrup from mud and other impurities; boils raw juice to required
VOLUME II B 443
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
temperature in open pan over fire or Code 8160
using suitable heating device, taking out Title Food and Related Products
scum from top of boiling juice from time Machine Operators
to time; frequently sprinkles water on
boiling juice to avoid overflowing and for 8160.5800
maintaining proper temperature; Withering Loft Attendant (Tea)
evaporates excess water till syrup of
desired viscosity is obtained; adds milk of
Withering Loft Attendant (Tea) tends lofts
lime or other cleaning agent, as necessary,
on which green tea leaves are withered
to clarify boiled syrup; strains syrup and
and supplies withered leaves to rolling
allows it to settle to remove sediments,
machine. Spreads green leaves thinly with
mud and impurities; transfers
hands or stick on layers of gunny or
concentrated syrup from pan into wooden
hessian cloth in withering lofts; allows
vats; allows it to cool and harden into gur.
leaves to wither for required time,
May clean pans, vats, work area.
according to their moisture contents and
weather conditions; checks leaves in
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
different lofts for proper withering,
Code 8160 judging by touch or sight; collects
Title Food and Related Products withered leaves from lifts by hand and
Machine Operators pushes required quantity through opening
on floor to feed rolling machine below on
8160.5700 receipt of signals from Roller Attendant.
Tea Maker May tend Rolling and Firing Machine.
Tea Maker controls various processes in ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
tea factory to treat and prepare green tea Code 8160
leaves fit for brewing and final Title Food and Related Products
preparation of green or black tea. Checks Machine Operators
that green tea leaves are withered in lofts,
by Withering Loft Attendant and have 8160.5900
proper moisture content, before rolling; Roller Attendant
ensures that withered leaves are properly
Roller Attendant; Rolling Machine
rolled by Roller Attendant; arranges for
Attendant (Tea) feeds and tends rolling
fermenting of rolled leaves and examines
machine to roll withered tea leaves.
them by touch, sight and smell for proper
Signals Withering Loft Attendant to supply
fermentation before firing or drying;
withered leaves for rolling; charges roller
checks that fermented leaves are dried at
drum with required quantity of withered
required temperature by Firing Machine
leaves by hand or basket; starts machine
Attendant and processed tea leaves are
pushing lever to roll withered leaves for
properly sorted and graded by Tea Factory
specified time; adjusts pressure of
Operatives; examines sample infusion of
machine as required by manipulating
different grades of tea and tastes to
lever; stops machine when leaves have
decide if colour, flavour and aroma are
been rolled and opens trap door to
according to desired standards.
release them into container placed below.
May feed and tend roll breaking machine
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to sieve rolled leaves.
VOLUME II B 444
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: into hopper of machine; adjusts gate in
Code 8160 spout to regulate flow of beans into reel;
Title Food and Related Products observes milling process, inspects beans
Machine Operators and adjusts rollers to prevent damage to
beans and proper dehusking of beans.
8160.6000 Performs related duties such as
lubricating equipment and repairing
Pulp Houseman (Coffee)
machinery. May keep production report.
May direct workers in storage of graded
Pulp Houseman (Coffee); Pulping Machine
coffee beans.
Attendant operates pulping machine
which cuts and removes fleshy pulp from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ripe coffee berries. Feeds or dumps into
Code 8160
hopper of machine with ripe coffee
Title Food and Related Products
berries manually; opens valves to let
Machine Operators
water flow into machine; regulates flow of
berries into machine by adjusting hopper
8160.6200
door opening to let them drop steadily
over running water; starts machine; Firing Machine Attendant (Tea)
observes operation of cutting and
removing of flesh from berries; allows Firing Machine Attendant; Drier (Tea)
pulped berries to flow into tank which tends firing or drying machine to dry
drains water and retains berries; removes rolled and fermented tea leaves, spreads
pulp from machine to dump-yard; refills rolled and fermented leaves evenly on
tank with water up to required level and tray beds of firing or drying machine;
rakes beans in water using wooden ladle manipulates valves to control flow of hot
to clean remaining fleshy skin from beans; air for maintaining proper temperature in
drains out water and removes cleaned drying chamber; checks by touch, smell
coffee beans and spreads them in open and sight whether leaves have been
yard for drying; keeps pulp house clean properly dried; manipulates levers to drop
and tidy. May attend to running repairs to dried leaves on floor or containers placed
machine. below; sends samples of cured tea leaves
to Tea Maker for testing.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8160 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Food and Related Products Code 8160
Machine Operators Title Food and Related Products
Machine Operators
8160.6100 8160.6300
Peeling Machine Attendant Tea Blender
(Coffee)
Tea Blender operates machine which
Peeling Machine Attendant (Coffee); mixes various grades of tea. Opens boxes
Huller Man (Coffee); Machine Room of tea and weighs out specific quantities
Worker (Coffee) tends huller to remove of each sort. Scoops or shovels weighed
husk from pulped coffee beans. Starts out quantities into machine and starts it.
machine; feeds required quantity of beans Ensures that tea is blended properly and
VOLUME II B 445
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
decides when blending is finished. May Code 8160
deliver mixture to packing machine. Title Food and Related Products
Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8160 8160.6600
Title Food and Related Products Roaster, Cocoa-Bean
Machine Operators
Roaster, Cocoa Bean roasts cocoa beans in
8160.6400 heated revolving cylinders. Loads
Coffee Blender cylinders with cocoa beans and starts it.
Observes roasting process and adjusts
Coffee Blender operates machine to mix heating mechanism as necessary. Tests
various grades of green coffee. Empties beans during roasting process by tasting,
bags of various grade of coffee, as smelling and feeling and decides when
specified in formula, into bin of machine. roasting is finished. Discharges roasted
Starts blending mechanism, which mixes beans into cooling receptacle. May
coffee. Ensures that coffee is blended operate machine in which beans are
properly and decides when blending is crushed and husks and chaff are
finished. Manipulates levers to dump separated.
blended coffee into elevators to get it
conveyed to clearing bins or to other ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
processing units prior to roasting. Code 8160
Title Food and Related Products
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Machine Operators
Code 8160
Title Food and Related Products 8160.6800
Machine Operators Brew Master
8160.6500 Brew Master supervises all production
Coffee Roaster activities in making beer and other malt
liquor from grain. Observes and
Coffee Roaster; Coffee-roasting Machine supervises operations, such as receiving,
Operator tends oven that roast green cleaning and steeping (soaking in water)
coffee beans. Weighs batch of coffee of grain; germination of grain; drying of
beans in scale-hopper, and opens chute to germinated grain; making of mash and
allow beans to flow into roasting oven; extraction of wort; fermentation of wort
observes and adjusts controls to maintain and other processes in manufacture of
required temperature; roasts coffee for malt liquors, e.g., filtration, bottling,
specified time or estimates roasting time storing of liquors. Gives specific
by comparing colour of beans from oven instructions on handling of each batch;
with standard sample; opens discharge tastes liquor, giving directions as to
gate to dump roasted beans to cool them. alteration of malt content and other
Stores roasted beans in airtight containers composition changes, as necessary; and
for powdering. May tend machine that ensures quality and quantity of
grinds coffee. production. May place order for purchase
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: of, or purchase of raw materials. May
VOLUME II B 446
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
control stocks of barley, malt and pans or cookers equipped with
different qualities of bear brewed and mechanical agitators to specified level
bottled. May direct repairs and with water and heats by steam to
alterations. prescribed temperature; weighs out
prescribed quantity of malt and puts it
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: into heated water; cooks mixture while it
Code 8160 is mechanically agitated for specified time
Title Food and Related Products at prescribed temperature, converting it
Machine Operators into malt extract known as wort; transfers
mixture into filtering tank using strainer
8160.6900 for separating pulp from liquid; and
pumps mash to tank, preparatory to
Malt Maker
fermenting. May cool mash preparatory
to distilling, by pumping it into cooling vat
Malt Maker; Germination Maker; Malt
equipped with coils through which cold
House Supervisor makes malt from barley
water circulates.
or other grain closely supervising different
processes in manufacture. Weighs and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
dumps grain or barley into steeping
Code 8160
(soaking) tank by operating valve to
Title Food and Related Products
increase or decrease supply of steam;
Machine Operators
allows it to soak for specified time, stirring
it with long pole; spreads soaked grain on
8160.7100
floor and turns it over with wooden hand
plough or shovel to aerate it and cool it, Fermentation Man
sprinkling water on it, as necessary; or
loads soaked grain into drums, Fermentation Man; Fermenting Room
compartments, or kilns, and lets in and Man; Fermentation Worker controls
controls hot air current, temperature, fermentation process in making distilled
water sprinkling, and rotation of drum, or or malt liquors or wine. Removes steam
operation of agitators for drying sprouted by compressed air from fermentation
grain; supervises its unloading from kiln. tanks and cools them to specified
May keep record of temperature temperature by admitting cold water to
maintained and time taken. pipe lines; pumps wort (liquid separated
from solid part of cooked mash) or mash
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: into fermentation tank and
Code 8160 simultaneously admits yeast from another
Title Food and Related Products pipe for mixing with wort or mash;
Machine Operators maintains solution at specified
temperature during fermentation process
8160.7000 by observing thermometer and regulating
valves of steam heating coils; makes
Masher
periodic tests of specific gravity with
hydrometer; adds yeast, sugar or water,
Masher, Cooker, Mash, Brew House
as necessary; accelerates chemical
Worker cooks malt with water to prepare
reaction by admitting air through a valve;
mash and malt extract (called wort) for
periodically removes froth formed at top
making distilled or malt liquors. Fills tubs,
VOLUME II B 447
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
of fermenting beer; removes yeast by Malt Vinegar Maker supervises all process
suction or other means, and pumps concerned with manufacture of malt
fermented solution to cistern or other vinegar. Observes operations, such as
settling vessel; flushes tanks and pipes receiving and cleaning of grain; steeping
with cold water, sterilizes them , closes of grain in tanks filled with water;
drain, and refills them, with live steam. spreading of steeped grain on floor;
grinding of grain; making and fermenting
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: of mash; clarifying of fermented vinegar
Code 8160 by filtering. Gives directions concerning
Title Food and Related Products temperature, rate of flow of materials and
Machine Operators quantity of materials needed. Tastes
vinegar and gives instructions as to
8160.7200 alterations in composition of contents.
May buy raw materials.
Yeast Maker
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Yeast Maker produces yeast required in
Code 8160
fermentation of mash used in production
Title Food and Related Products
of distilled and malt liquors. Weighs out
Machine Operators
prescribed quantity of barley, rye or other
grain meal; dumps it into measured
8160.7400
quantity of water heated to specific
temperature in special wooden vat; mixes Filterman
grain and water, using agitator; cooks
mixture by admitting steam into coils, in Filterman; Filtration Worker controls
vat; cools mash by running cold water filtration plant to filter beer to remove
through cooling coils in vat; pours sediments and impurities. Attaches pulp
prepared yeast solution or culture into filter pads in filter machine; opens valve
mixture and stirs with agitator; regulates to pass beer through it; maintains correct
temperature of fermenting mash by pressure of liquor by adjusting gauges,
running hot or cold water through coils in valve; removes filter, cakes and pads and
vat; ascertains specific gravity and acid cleans in hot water for re-use; flushes
content of mash by using hydrometer and equipment with hot water and sterilizes
performing simple chemical tests; with steam.
separates yeast from liquor by means of
centrifugal separator or filter press. May ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
draw off yeast from fermentation tanks by Code 8160
suction pump or by skimming. Title Food and Related Products
Machine Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8160 8160.7500
Title Food and Related Products Pasteuriser, Brewery
Machine Operators
Pasteuriser, Brewery pasteurises beer
8160.7300
bottles and sorts out defective ones.
Malt Vinegar Maker Opens water inlet cock in pasteurisation
tank containing beer bottles to fill water
VOLUME II B 448
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
few inches above crowns of bottles; opens Ensures proper filtration and cooling by
steam valves to heat water to specified getting samples tested, as necessary. May
temperature; checks water temperature wash and clean heating pan, filter-press,
periodically with thermometer, operating chiller and pipe lines after preparation of
steam valve to ensure constant each batch of syrup by passing hot water
temperature; removes bottles showing through whole system. May set steam
leakage of gas due to defective crowning; pressure of heating chamber when
opens cold water spray pipes to cool necessary. May guide Syrup Mixing Plant
down bottles after required period; drains Operator.
out water by opening outlet cock of tank
after bottles have cooled down. Records ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
pasteurisation time of each tank. Code 8160
Title Food and Related Products
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Machine Operators
Code 8160
Title Food and Related Products 8160.7700
Machine Operators Syrup Maker
8160.7600
Syrup Maker prepares syrups of different
Syrup Plant Operator flavours for making sweet aerated drinks
by mixing and boiling ingredients. Weighs
Syrup Plant Operator prepares sugar syrup or measures sugar or saccharine and
by dissolving requisite quantity of sugar in mixes specified quantity of water; boils
known volume of water in steam heated solution in kettle or pan to desired
pan and pumps it through filter press and consistency, removing scum from top of
chiller for filtration, cooling and onward syrup; allows syrup to cool down; filters
transmission to mixing chamber. Sets and pours it into different pitches, or
volume, meter, fitted to steam heated conveys syrup by means of plastic-hose to
closed pan or vessel, and opens valve to syrup room; adds and mixes requisite
admit known volume of water in heating quantity of essences, fruit juices or other
chamber; opens valve to let in steam into ingredients for making flavoured syrup,
coils of heating pan; switches on stirrer; such as lemon, ginger, orange, rose etc.
and weighs and adds required quantity of May make flavoured syrup for "sherbet"
sugar to heated water. Continues heating and be designated as SHERBET MAKER.
and records temperature of sugar solution May fill bottles with specified quantity of
from time to time by manually dipping syrup. May wash and clean utensils,
thermometer in it; ensures by sight that vessels etc. after making syrup.
heating pan is full to specified level to
form homogenous solution; changes filter ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
papers, if necessary and sets filter press Code 8160
and chiller; heats sugar solution up to Title Food and Related Products
prescribed temperature. Opens discharge Machine Operators
valve of heating pan and switches on
pump to force syrup (sugar solution) 8160.7800
through filter press and chiller for onward
Syrup Mixing Plant Operator
transmission to syrup mixing chamber.
VOLUME II B 449
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Syrup Mixing Plant Operator operates ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
syrup mixing plant for making cold drinks Code 8160
and aerated water. Opens valve to admit Title Food and Related Products
syrup up to prescribed level in mixing Machine Operators
chamber; switches on mixing chamber
agitator for adding essence, colour etc. to 8160.8000
syrup; continues mixing for specified time
Bottling Plant In Charge
and gets samples tested, if necessary;
opens valves and switches on pump to
Bottling Plant In Charge; Bottling Plant
admit cold water into cooler and to
Machinist; Bottling Plant Mistry/Operator
transfer solution from mixing chamber to
sets, adjusts and operates washing, filling,
bottling plant through coolers; prepares
bottling, mixing, crowning and other
solution of weighed quantity of soda-bi-
machines in aerated water factory or
carb with water, filters and mixes it with
brewery. Ensures automatic and thorough
treated water in mixing chamber, and
washing of bottles; disconnects supply
pumps it direct to bottling plant for
line and trial runs various machines for
making soda water. May wash mixing
testing proper filling, making necessary
chambers with hot water after
adjustments in machines, if warranted by
preparation of each batch of solution.
trial run; connects supply line for feeding
May keep record of quantity of solution
purified water (in aerated water plant) or
prepared. May keep shop floor clean and
beer (in beer bottling); starts machine by
assist in periodical repairs. May mix
operating lever, regulating air pressure to
essence, dye, etc. in mixing chamber.
ensure uniform filling of bottles. Sets and
operates various other machines,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
adjusting levers, gears, gauges, pressure
Code 8160
and temperature controls for proper
Title Food and Related Products
mixing, crowning and sorting of bottles.
Machine Operators
Co-ordinates and guides workers to
maintain stipulated production, remove
8160.7900
defects and minimise wastages; repairs,
Syruper maintains and overhauls machinery and
equipment. May attend to water
Syruper; Syrup Mixer, Aerated Water fills treatment plant for purifying water. May
bottles with specified quantity of syrup for set carbon dioxide gas purifier, carbonator
making sweet aerated drinks. Receives plant, bottling plant and related
empty washed bottles, checks if properly equipment, if engaged in aerated water
cleaned; pushes neck of bottle to nozzle factory.
connected with syrup tank; opens valve
and drains required quantity of syrup in ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
bottles. Passes on filled bottles to Filler for Code 8160
making sweet aerated drinks. May fill Title Food and Related Products
bottles manually from pan, vessel, Machine Operators
pitchers containing syrup, using measures.
May cook and prepare different flavours 8160.8100
of syrup.
Bottle Washer, Machine
VOLUME II B 450
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Bottle Washer, Machine; Washing hopper. May act as Bottling Plant In
Machine Operator operates bottle Charge.
washing machine for washing empty used
or dirty bottles. Arranges for collection of ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
empty used bottles from go-down to Code 8160
washing machine; adds prescribed Title Food and Related Products
quantity of chemical to water in washing Machine Operators
tanks, changing cleaning brushes, if
required; opens and regulates steam valve 8160.8300
to heat up tank water up to prescribed
Filler, Aerated Water
temperature; guides and watches
operations to ensure good condition of
Filler, Aerated Water; Filling Machine
brushes used, adequate pressure of spray
Operator, Aerated Water operates
and proper scrubbing and cleaning of
automatic filling, mixing and crowning
bottles. May check bottles at delivery end
machines to fill bottles with syrup and
of machine and remove damaged,
carbonated water, fix crowns on them and
defective or unclean bottles. May pull out
mix contents. Feeds crowns in crowning
stuck-up bottles by lifting stopper weights.
machine hopper, and syrup and
carbonated water in filling machine;
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
switches on syrup and bottle filling
Code 8160
machines, opens conveyor gate trap to
Title Food and Related Products
allow bottles to pass first to syrup filling
Machine Operators
and then to carbonated water filling
machine, preventing jamming of bottles
8160.8200
by controlling conveyor gate trap, as
Carbonator Machine Attendant necessary; switches on crowning and
mixing machines and chain conveyor for
Carbonator Machine Attendant operates crowning filled bottles and mixing their
carbon dioxide gas purifier cylinders and contents, tapping crowning machine
carbonator plant for passing specified hopper with mallet, if crowns get stuck
volume of gas to bottle filling plant. up. Watches operations and readings of
Connects carbon dioxide cylinder with gas and oil pressure. Water temperature
pipeline of purifying cylinders, containing and speedometer; removes stuck-up and
potassium permanganate water, activated defective bottles; and feeds crowning
carbon or any other suitable material, and machine hopper, as necessary. May be
adjusts valve of carbonator plant; opens designated as CROWNING MACHINE
valve of carbon dioxide cylinder with OPERATOR, if engaged on particular type
spanner and allows gas (carbon dioxide) of machine.
to pass through purifying cylinders,
carbonator plant and thence to filling ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine; watches pressure gauge reading Code 8160
and adjusts gas valve or replaces cylinder Title Food and Related Products
to regulate flow of gas; sprays hot water Machine Operators
on carbon-dioxide cylinder to vaporise
liquid carbon dioxide in cylinder, if any. 8160.8400
May feed crowns in crowning machine
VOLUME II B 451
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Filler, Aerated Water, Hand specified limits. Starts blower and
Machine regulates flow of air in cooling drum to
cool shredded tobacco coming from drier.
May feed tobacco to machine.
Filler, Aerated Water, Hand Machine
operates manually controlled filling
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine to fill carbonated water in
bottles. Fills crown or marble stoppered Code 8160
bottles with prescribed quantity of Title Food and Related Products
purified water; opens lid of machine and Machine Operators
places filled bottles in single or multi-
chambers of filling machine; closes lid, 8160.8700
opens valve to let in carbon dioxide gas Cutting Machine Operator, Tobacco
from cylinders into filled bottles at
particular pressure; rotates machine by Cutting Machine Operator, Tobacco;
hand, giving specified number of rotations Shredding Machine Operator, Tobacco
to machine to obtain correct carbonation; tends machine that cuts tobacco into
checks up carbonation by opening lid, shreds for use in making cigarettes. Sets
whenever necessary; removes carbonated cutting knife and adjusts machine; fills
water bottles from machine and hands hopper of cutting machine with leaves;
over for crowning (sealing). May attend to starts machine, causing feed rolls to
repair and maintenance of machine. May revolve and knife to reciprocate; watches
be designated according to make of cutting process to ensure that machine is
machine handled-CLUB MACHINE FILLER; shredding tobacco correctly; makes minor
if operates club machine for filling only adjustments to machine, such as
carbon dioxide gas in bottles, purified tightening bolts that hold knives in place
water having been filled in bottles and adjusting rollers; checks cut tobacco
separately. by feeling it with fingers to ensure
moisture content; draws cut tobacco from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: knife by hand to platform;
Code 8160 removes/rejects such as stems, uncut
Title Food and Related Products leaves, and other foreign matter and
Machine Operators pushes rest of cut tobacco to conveyor;
replaces dulled knives with sharpened
8160.8600 ones when necessary. May clean and oil
Drier and Cooler Operator, Tobacco machine.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Drier and Cooler Operator, Tobacco
operates drying and cooling machine to Code 8160
dry and cool processed and shredded Title Food and Related Products
tobacco by subjecting to hot and then to Machine Operators
cool air. Starts driers (rotating drums) and
turns valves to admit steam to heat coils 8160.8800
of driers, or opens valves of gas burners Cigarette Making Machine
and sets thermostat; periodically feels Operator
tobacco to determine dryness and
regulates heat to dry tobacco within
VOLUME II B 452
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Cigarette Making Machine Operator tends separates paper from tobacco. May
automatic machine to make cigarettes. attend to minor repairs to machine.
Places roll of cigarette paper on spindle;
sets monogram printing device to print ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
brand name on paper at specified Code 8160
position; regulates flow of shredded Title Food and Related Products
tobacco to insure that cigarette contains Machine Operators
specified amount of tobacco; fills ink and
glue reservoir; threads cigarette paper 8160.9900
between guide rolls and adjust friction
Food and Related Products
tension on holding spindles using wrench;
Machine Operators
starts machine and observes operation to
ensure that shredded tobacco is
Food and Related Products Machine
automatically drawn and wrapped in
Operators, other include operators who
cigarette paper, forming a continuous
set, operate and attend machinery used
tube, and that tube of wrapped tobacco is
to slaughter animals, trim meat from
cut at correct intervals into cigarettes;
carcasses; bake, freeze, heat, crush, mix,
when making filter, cork-tipped cigarettes,
blend and otherwise process foodstuffs,
places coil of tipping material on spindle
beverages and tobacco leaves not
and fills hopper with filters; replaces full
elsewhere classified.
cigarette catching trays with empty ones;
reports malfunction to superiors; cleans
paper scraps and waste materials from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine. May be designated according to
type of cigarettes as FILTER-CIGARETTE Code
MAKING OPERATOR. Title
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Group 817
Code 8160 Wood Processing and Paper
Title Food and Related Products Making Plant Operators
Machine Operators
Wood Processing and Papermaking Plant
8160.8900
Operators monitor, operate, and control
Stingy Cigarette Slitting Machine
automated lumber mill equipment sawing
Operator wood, cutting veneer and making
plywood, and otherwise preparing wood
Stingy Cigarette Slitting Machine for further use. Pulp Mill Machine
Operator; Defective Cigarette Slitter tends Operators operate and monitor various
machine that cuts paper from defective types of processing machinery and
cigarettes to reclaim tobacco. Attaches equipment to produce pulp.
hoisting bar to tub of cigarettes; starts
machine and pulls rope to hoist tub and Occupations in this Group are classified
dump cigarettes into hopper that feeds into the following Families:
cigarettes under cutting knives and on to
separator (Vibrating Screen) that 8171 Pulp and Papermaking Plant
Operators
VOLUME II B 453
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8172 Wood Processing Plant Operators starts machine and regulates water sprays
to cool grindstones and control
consistency of pulp. Sets pressure of
Family 8171
hydraulic pistons to force material
Pulp and Papermaking Plant
between revolving stones; observes
Operators
colour of flowing pulp for evidence of
bans caused by dulled or broken
Pulp and Papermaking Plant Operators grindstones or by jamming of material;
operate and monitor multi-function loosens jams with hand tools and notifies
process control machinery and processing supervisor of needed repairs. May be
equipment to control the processing of designated according to type of grinding
wood, scrap pulp and other cellulose machine used.
materials in the production of pulp.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8171.0100 Code 8171
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
Chipper man, Paper Pulp
Operators
Chipperman, Paper Pulp; Chipping
8171.0400
Machine Operator, Paper Pulp operates
machine to cut logs, wooden-blocks, Sorter, Paper Pulp
bamboo etc. into small chips for making
paper pulp. Selects cutting blade Sorter, Paper Pulp sorts and picks rags,
according to material to be chipped and waste papers, straw, etc. to eliminate
mounts it on cutting head of chipping foreign and undesirable matter for making
machine. Starts machine and feeds logs, paper pulp. Spreads stock on floor;
blocks, pieces of stumps or other wood discards coloured, greasy and other
into hopper of chipped machine; Removes undesirable material; packs acceptable
chips when container is filled. May material in bags. May be designated
segregate over-size or unusable wood. DUSTER, PAPER PULP if engaged in
May inspect and change knives on manually rotating conical screen for
machine. removing dust from waste material.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8171 Code 8171
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
Operators Operators
8171.0200 8171.0500
Grinder, Paper Pulp Cutter, Paper Pulp
Grinder, Paper Pulp; Grinding Machine Cutter, Paper Pulp cuts rags, waste paper,
Operator, Paper Pulp operates power- straw, etc. to small pieces with cutting
driven grinding machine to reduce wood machine for making paper pulp,
chips into pulp for use in making paper, appropriate cutter blade on cutting head
adjusts distance between grinding stones of machine. Places material such as rags,
in machine, loads hopper with chips, waste paper and straw on feeder roll or
VOLUME II B 454
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
conveyor belt of machine. Starts machine, Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
examines cut material for size and adjusts Operators
or sharpens machine knives if necessary.
May clean dirt and dust from dust 8171.0900
compartment. Bleacher, Paper Pulp
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Bleacher, Paper Pulp; Bleaching Machine
Code 8171 Operator, Paper Pulp operates bleaching
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant equipment that bleaches material, such as
Operators wood pulp, rags, straw or waste-paper
pulp. Charges machine with material and
8171.0600 bleaching solution and starts agitator;
Liquor Maker, Paper Pulp admits steam for heating mixture and
regulates valves in accordance with
Liquor Maker, Paper Pulp prepares liquor temperature readings; observes bleaching
for cooking paper pulp. Collects standard process, notes colour of material and
chemical substances such as lime and sends samples to laboratory for testing;
soda ash and mixes them with water in transfers bleached material into washer
fixed proportions in vat; agitates mixture for neutralizing it with water sprays, then
to dissolve solids and produce uniform to blending tank for mixing with other
solution; takes samples periodically to batches to obtain uniform quality. May
determine concentration. add chemical during bleaching process
and make chemical or electrolytic tests.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: May prepare bleaching solutions and be
designated accordingly.
Code 8171
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Operators
Code 8171
8171.0800 Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
Operators
Causticman, Paper
Pulp/Caustisizing Operator
8171.1100
Agitator, Paper Pulp
Causticman, Paper Pulp processes paper
pulp to required viscosity by treating it
Agitator, Paper Pulp agitates paper pulp in
with caustic acid. Opens valves to load
semi-liquid stage on sieve to spread pulp
mixing tank with soda ash and milk of lime
evenly. Pours semi-liquid pulp on sieve,
in predetermined quantities; starts
agitates sieve containing pulp to drain off
agitators to dissolve and mix ingredients.
surplus water and to spread pulp evenly;
Measures specific gravity and adds more
picks out dirt and other foreign matter
ingredients or water as needed. Pipes
and flips partially dried pulp on to felt
mixture to reactor tank and continuously
sheet for later pressing and drying.
samples concentration to determine its
viscosity.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 8171
Code 8171
VOLUME II B 455
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant informs Machine Man about malfunction;
Operators separates felt and paper after pressing.
8171.1200 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Machine Operator, Paper Code 8171
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
Machine Operator, Paper sets up and Operators
operates paper-making machine to
convert wet pulp into paper or paper 8171.1600
board. Starts flow of paper pulp from Cutter, Paper
storage tank through rotary screens to
machine, adding water as necessary to Cutter, Paper; Guillotineman, Paper cuts
thin pulp; removes dirt and other foreign paper or card-board sheets to desired size
matter from rotary screens and regulates on cutting machine. Adjusts guides on
flow of pulp to moving wire mesh belt on scale to obtain specified length of sheet;
which paper is formed. Co-ordinates places sheets against guide and presses
speed of belt and flow of pulp to obtain lever to force knife blade through sheets.
paper of desired weight. Sets machine Turns stack, resets, guides and cuts sheets
controls for width, thickness and moisture breadthwise. Cleans and oils machine.
content of paper. Threads formed paper May be designated according to type of
between press rolls to squeeze out knife used, as GUILLOTINE CUTTER.
moisture and give it shape; supervises
machine crew in drying, sizing, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
calendaring, winding and cutting paper.
Code 8171
Adjusts, cleans, repairs and replaces
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
machine parts. May weigh samples of
Operators
paper and install Dandy Rollers to impress
water mark in paper.
8171.1700
Finisher, Paper
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8171
Finisher, Paper sorts, counts and packs
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
paper in standard quantities. Checks and
Operators
examines cut paper sheets for defects;
removes defective and non-standard
8171.1400
sheets, counts sheets of finished paper
Wireboy, Paper
into quires or reams, packs them in
labelled wrappers; seals bundles with
Wireboy, Paper adjusts wet felt between gummed tape.
presses to ensure that paper is not spoilt
due to faulty movement over endless ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
wire-mesh belt. Checks flow of paper pulp
Code 8171
on wire-mesh belt through rotary screens
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
to machine and adjusts position of wet
Operators
felt between presses so that paper is not
spoiled due to faulty travel over wire
8171.1800
mesh; examines and marks defects and
VOLUME II B 456
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Vatman, Hand Made Paper Tub-Sizer, Hand Made Paper dips paper in
sizing solution to make it non-absorbent.
Vatman, Hand Made Paper; Paper Drifter Cooks ingredients (glue, starch or similar
dips screen into paper pulp and drains off agent) in water; adds chemicals to prevent
water after pulp settles on wireframe. Fits decomposition; transfers size to storage
bevelled wooden frame (deckle) on wire tank or tub; dips individual sheets in
mesh mould; checks consistency of paper solution to moisten both surfaces; lays out
pulp in vat and adds water as necessary to dipped sheets for further processing.
thin pulp; stirs pulp with hand or wooden
stick to remove dirt and foreign matter ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and mix pulp properly; dips mould with Code 8171
deckle into paper pulp; gauges amount of Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
pulp to be lifted, with draws mould, and Operators
forms ‘waterleaf’ by shaking to intertwine
fibres of pulp; removes deckle. May work 8171.2100
as TRANSFERER, HAND MADE PAPER or Drier, Hand Made Paper
PRESSER HAND MADE PAPER.
Drier, Hand Made Paper dries sized paper
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
sheets. Separates sheets from
Code 8171 compressed pack and suspends them on
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant soft ropes or lays them out on hessian
Operators sheets to dry. Checks paper for dryness;
removes and packs dried sheets.
8171.1900
Transferer, Hand Made Paper ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8171
Transferer, Hand Made Paper; Coucher Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
turns over paper mould and deposits Operators
sheet of hand-made ‘waterleaf’ on wet
felt. Removes deckle (beveled wooden 8171.2200
frame) from pulp vat and turns over Presser, Hand Made Paper
mould to deposit sheet of handmade
‘waterleaf’ on wet felt; piles ‘waterleaf’
Presser, Hand Made Paper operates screw
and felts alternately to form a stack for
press manually to squeeze and remove
pressing; forms pile. May perform duties
moisture from paper sheets. Places moist
of Vatman and Presser.
sheets, wrapped in cloth, in presser;
closes press to squeeze moisture from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
paper.
Code 8171
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Operators
Code 8171
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
8171.2000
Operators
Tub-Sizer, Hand Made Paper
8171.2400
VOLUME II B 457
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Calenderman, Hand Made Paper Pulp and Papermaking Plant
Operators, Other
Calenderman, Hand-made Paper glazes
paper by placing sheets between two Paper Making Plant Operators, Other
zinc/iron plates and pressing them in perform various routine and low skilled
manually operated stack of rollers. tasks in preparation of paper such as
Collects dried paper sheets to be putting rolls of paper on cutting machine,
calendered; sets and arranges sheets of peeling sheets of paper from each other
paper in between iron/zinc plates; inserts and are designated as; Cutter Helper
plates into rollers; moves handle to press assists Cutter Operator by hoisting rolls of
paper sheets between rollers in order to paper into Cutter rack, threading paper
glaze and smoothen them. Removes into machine and adjusting speed of
glazed paper from plates, stacks them cutter. Peeler paper assists in peeling
separately. May operate electrically sheets of paper from each other, etc.
driven calendering machine.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8171
Code 8171 Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant Operators
Operators
Family 8172
8171.2500
Coating-Machine Operator, Wood Processing Plant Operators
Hardboard (Paper Goods)
Wood Processing Plant Operators
Coating-Machine Operator, Hardboard monitor, operate, and control automated
(Paper Goods) operates machine to spray lumber mill equipment for sawing timber
paint and print surface finish on logs into rough lumber, cutting veneer,
hardboard sheets: Fills hoppers of making plywood and particle board, and
machine with ready-mixed paint. Starts otherwise preparing wood for further use.
machine and moves controls to regulate
spraying action, specified tension of
8172.0100
rollers, and temperature of infrared drying
Wood Sawyer, Machine, General
lamps. Tests density of paint, using
viscometer. May tend machine that coats
Wood Sawyer, Machine, General sets and
unfinished insulation board with talc to
operates different kinds of wood sawing
prevent sticking during subsequent
machine such as band saw, circular saw,
pressing.
crosscut saw etc. for sawing timber to
required sizes. Selects and sets circular
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
saw, band saw or cross cut saw as
Code 8171
appropriate securely on machine ensuring
Title Pulp and Papermaking Plant
proper alignment and tension, adjusts
Operators
guides, steps and applies other controls to
determine speed and quality of cut
8171.9900
according to nature of wood and size of
planks to be cut. Places timber or logs
VOLUME II B 458
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
over machine table, using hoists, pulleys, Code 8172
etc. Adjusts or inserts end stops and Title Wood Processing Plant Operators
gauges on table to desired length and
width and starts machine. Pushes log 8172.0300
against running saw along marking, Band Saw Operator
removes cut wood from table and repeats
process. May measure log and scantlings
Band Saw Operator operates power
and calculate percentage of turnover. May
driven endless steel band saw to cut log
sharpen saws and clean and oil machine
beams or planks to required sizes, Selects
to maintain it in working order. May
and fits band saw of appropriate size and
specialize in any particular type of sawing
sharpness over pulley of machine
machine and be designated accordingly.
depending on type of wood to be cut and
secures it tightly by turning hand wheels
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
of machine ensuring proper alignment
Code 8172 and tension. Places log or timber over
Title Wood Processing Plant Operators platform of machine using hoisting
equipment or with help of workers and
secures it firmly to traverser with clamps,
8172.0200 hooks, wedges etc. Adjusts machine table,
Wood Sawyer, Edger guides, stops, and other controls to
ensure that band saw cuts log or clamps
Woods Sawyer, Edger; Edger Machine to required sizes. Selects speed for
Operator sets and operates multiple blade movement or rotation of band saw, starts
sawing machine to straighten uneven machine and operates hand lever to move
edges and cut rough wood planks into traverser with log against rotating saw for
boards of required widths. Collects wood cutting log or plank to required sizes.
planks and determines depth of cut Controls movement of log against rotating
necessary to obtain straight edge, places saw, slowing its speed when knots in
the planks on edger table. Checks wood are to be cut. Removes cut pieces
sharpness of saw and sets and spaces saw from table. Cleans sticky saw dust from
blades to required positions to cut plank pulleys and band saw to remove friction
to required dimensions. Adjusts power and oil machine. May sharpen teeth of
and speed of feeding mechanism saw over grinding machine. May braze
according to thickness of plank. Starts joints of band saw. May operate vertical
machine and pushes plank into feed or horizontal log band mill.
rollers to carry it into saw cutters. Cuts
and straightens uneven edges to shape ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
them into planks of desired width. Checks Code 8172
edging and cutting of plank to ensure Title Wood Processing Plant Operators
accuracy and quality and readjusts blades
when necessary cleans and oils machine. 8172.0400
May sharpen or replace dull saw blades. Circular Saw Operator
May operate other power driven wood
working machine.
Circular Saw Operator saws plank and
lumber by power driven circular saw.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Selects and fits circular saw of appropriate
VOLUME II B 459
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
size (toothed disk) to spindle of machine Peeling Machine Operator sets and
and secures it tightly in position with nuts operates wood peeling machine for
and bolts. Adjusts machine table to cutting wooden billets into veneers of
required height and sets guide setters on required size and thickness for making
machine table according to size of plank match boxes, splints, plywood, etc. Selects
to be cut. Sets cutting angle of saw if and fits cutting required sizes of veneer
required and starts machine to rotate and scouring of grooves on it for folding it.
spindle with disk at required speed. Gets Adjusts and fastens billet on machine by
timber placed on machine table using tightening end forks of rotary lathe sets
hoist and other equipment and adjusts it angle of cutting tool. Adjusts gap between
against guide setter. Pushes timber along pressure bar and knife and operates
guide setter against rotating saw for machine to remove required size of thin
cutting it and places cut pieces at one end. strips of veneer from surface of billet.
Cleans and oils machine. May sharpen Checks size of veneer to ensure required
teeth of saw manually or on grinding specification. Runs machine at steady
machine. speed to obtain uniform sized strips
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: eliminating knotted and defective area of
Code 8172 billet. Replaces blunt cutters and lancets.
Title Wood Processing Plant Operators May clean and oil machine. May attend to
running repairs of machine.
8172.0700
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Veneer Cutter
Code 8172
Title Wood Processing Plant Operators
Veneer Cutter; Veneer Machine Operator
sets and operates rotary cutting machine
8172.0900
for cutting wood stock into thin shaving or
veneer of required sizes. Selects cutters Barrel-Lathe Operator, Outside
and fits them on to rotating spindle of (Wood Container)
machine. Mounts and fastens wood stock
in position on machine table. Adjusts Barrel-Lathe Operator, Outside (Wood
blades in machines close to wood stock Container) operates machine to scrape
and starts machine to cut wood into thin and smooth outer surface of barrel by
shavings or veneers of required size. holding hand tools against barrel:
Checks quality of shaving and veneers, Removes temporary hoops from barrel
ensuring that no damaged wood is and places barrel horizontally on barrel
processed. May fit circular saw or blades rest. Starts machine. Clamps barrel
to process wood stock. May grind and between chucks of lathe. Holds barrel
sharpen tools. plane against surface of revolving barrel
and guides tool along length of barrel to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: scrape and smooth barrel. Lifts tool from
Code 8172 surface of barrel, releases pressure of tail
Title Wood Processing Plant Operators chuck on barrel, and lifts barrel from
machine.
8172.0800
Peeling Machine Operator ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8172
VOLUME II B 460
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Title Wood Processing Plant Operators Core Layer, Plywood assembles plywood
panels from glue covered veneer sheets,
8172.1000 core board and face sheets, working as
Wood Chopping Machine Operator member of team. Receives veneer sheets
as they emerge from glue spreader and
places them cross-grained in sequence on
Wood Chopping Machine Operator sets
wooden core until specified thickness is
and operates wood chopping machine for
obtained. Pushes trays of plywood on to
cutting veneer layers into required sizes.
conveyor or stacks plywood on hand
Adjusts machine table, guides, stops and
truck. May assist in cleaning rollers of glue
other controls depending on size of
spreader. May brush glue on irregularly
veneer or splint to be cut. Places veneer
shaped veneer sheets which do not fit in
pieces on machine table in position and
glue spreader.
adjusts it against guide setter. Starts
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
machine and slides veneer pieces along
table against end stop to cut them as Code 8172
required. Removes cut pieces of veneer. Title Wood Processing Plant Operators
May clean and oil machine.
8172.9900
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Wood Processing Plant Operators
Code 8172 and Related Workers, Other
Title Wood Processing Plant Operators
Wood Processing and Papermaking Plant
8172.1100
Operators, Other perform variety of
Core Laying Machine Operator routine and low skilled tasks such as
holding lumber while sawing, feeding
Core Laying Machine Operator tends boards and planks against cutter,
machine, which automatically lays face, spreading glue in adjacent surfaces etc.
back, and core veneer sheets in sequence and may be designated as Sawyer Helper,
and spreads glue on core sheets to form Gluing Machine Operator, Paster, Wood
plywood panels. Starts machine, observes Clipping Machine Operator, etc.
its operation, and turns wheels, valves
and dials to adjust and synchronize ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
conveyors, reach end vacuum of Code 8172
mechanical arms, tension on glue- Title Wood Processing Plant Operators
spreading rollers, and to regulate flow of
glue. Pushes pedal to control conveyor,
which moves stacked panels to hot plate Group 818
presses.
Other Stationary Plant and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Machine Operators
Code 8172
Title Wood Processing Plant Operators
This group includes Stationary Plant and
Machine Operators not classified
8172.1200
elsewhere in sub-major group 81,
Core Layer, Plywood
Stationary Plant and Machine Operators.
VOLUME II B 461
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
The group includes, for instance, articles moulded such as BLOWING
operators of machines which make silicon MACHINE OPERATOR, GLASS BULBS, etc.
chips and splice cables and ropes.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Occupations in this Group are classified Code 8181
into the following Families: Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
Operators
8181 Glass and Ceramics Plant
Operators 8181.0200
8182 Steam-Engine and Boiler Operators Machine Man, Sheet Glass
8183 Packing, Bottling and Labelling
Machine Operators Machine Man, Sheet Glass sets and
8189 Gem and Jewellery Machine operates glass-drawing machine that
Operators
produces continuous sheets of window
and other flat glass. Switches on heating
apparatus in machine to raise
Family 8181
temperature to level of plastic glass to
Glass and Ceramics Plant Operators
prevent breakage. Adjusts and sets in
position asbestos rollers in machine
Glass and Ceramics Plant Operators
through which plastic glass is to pass;
operate and monitor kilns, furnaces and
starts machine so that plastic glass flows
other machinery and equipment used in
in from furnace end, passes through a
the manufacture of glass, ceramics,
series of asbestos rollers on machine
porcelain, tiles or bricks. They operate
which roll amorphous plastic glass into
machines to anneal, harden or decorate
sheets of required thickness; adjusts and
glass and ceramics.
regulates speed and position of rollers to
prevent warping and breakage of glass
8181.0100 sheets, and to obtain glass sheets of
Blowing Machine Operator (Glass) desired thickness. Removes broken and
defective portions of rolled sheets. Cleans
Blowing Machine Operator (Glass) and oils machine, and carries out running
operates machine which blows objects repairs. May operate machine to break
such as bottles, jars, glass shells, of bulbs glass sheet at appropriate places. May be
and valves from molten glass. Places designated as BOTTOM MACHINE MAN or
parison (intermediate shape in production TOP MACHINE MAN, SHEET GLASS
of glass articles) in mould of machine, according to position of duty on machine.
closes mould and adjusts flow of lubricant ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to prevent glass sticking to mould; Code 8181
regulates flow of compressed air and Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
molten glass into shape of mould in Operators
machine; removes shaped articles from
mould, feeds them into glass grinders to 8181.0300
remove superfluous edges. Tests and Pressman (Glass)
checks samples of finished articles to
ensure standardization of products. May
Pressman; Press Operator (Glass) operates
be designated according to kind of glass
hand press to mould glass into required
VOLUME II B 462
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
shape. Sets mould in press according to 8181.0500
size and shape of article to be produced. Extruding Press Operator, Clay
Shears off proper quantity of molten glass
from iron rod, held by Gatherer into
Extruding Press Operator, Clay operates
machine mould. Operates lever to close
extruding press to extrude moist clay in
mould for compressing molten glass into
strips for further processing. Feeds moist
required shape; manipulates lever to
clay into machine. Moves lever to regulate
withdraw press head, takes out ware and
speed of warm (part of machine) which
sends it for annealing or further
forces clay through outlet form (die).
processing.
Examines texture of clay periodically and
it is extruded from machine and, if
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
required, warns other workers to change
Code 8181 moisture content of clay before it enters
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant press. May operate ceramics moulding,
Operators jigger or jolly machine.
8181.0400 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Pressman (Ceramics) Code 8181
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
Pressman; Press Operator; Moulder Operators
Machine (Ceramics) sets and operates
press machine to mould ceramic articles 8181.0600
from moist clay. Selects and fixes Roller Man (Glass)
appropriate die or mould in machine; oils
surface of lump of kneaded moist clay to
Roller Man; Belanwala (Glass) rotates
prevent its sticking to inside of mould;
roller to wind glass wire into coil used for
places clay lump in position on lower plate
making bangles. Selects iron roller of size
of mould box; turns handle and pulls lever
of bangles to be made; regulates furnace
to operate press which compresses clay
temperature at required level; fixes roller
mass into shape of mould, such as tile,
in furnace in position and draws glass wire
brick or sagger (fire clay container in
over roller; turns handle to rotate at
which pottery is placed for fixing in kiln or
desired speed to wind glass wire into coils
oven); presses pedal to lift form to
over roller; cuts glass when roller is full;
remove adhering particles to meet
removes roller, and takes out coil of glass
specification; cleans and adjusts mould
wire with a hooked rod. May direct
fitted to machine, if necessary. May be
heating of furnace to desired
designated according to nature of articles
temperature.
moulded such as SAGGAR MAKER,
MACHINE or BRICK MOULDER, MACHINE;
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
DIE PRESSER CERAMICS.
Code 8181
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Operators
Code 8181
8181.0700
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
Pressman (Abrasive)
Operators
VOLUME II B 463
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Pressman (Abrasive); Moulder, Hand 8181.1000
(Abrasive wheel) operates hand press to Polisher (Glass Mfg.)
press abrasive material into required
mould for making grinding wheels,
Polisher (Glass Manufacturing; Glass
sharpening stones, sticks etc. Mixes
Products) polishes edges or surfaces of
abrasive powder and adhesive paste
flat glass, using polishing wheels: Pours
according to formula; sets required type
polishing compound into hopper of
of mould to machine; fills prescribed
automatic feeder or applies compound to
quantity of abrasive mixture into mould;
polishing wheel with brush. Holds and
rakes and levels mixture in mould using
turns glass edge or engraved or beveled
levelling devices; operates levers to start
surface against white (cork) polishing
machine and press mould by closing top
wheel for rough polishing. Presses glass
and bottom parts of mould with required
edge, or scratched, engraved, or beveled
pressure for pressing abrasive powder in
surface against felt polishing wheel for
mould to desired shape and size; releases
final polishing or to remove scratches.
lever and stops machine. Removes mould
Wipes polished area and examines glass
from machine and dismantles mould
for smoothness.
plates to remove moulded abrasive
material; cleans mould and its parts and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
repeats process.
Code 8181
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Operators
Code 8181
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
8181.1100
Operators
Modeller, Pottery and Porcelain
8181.0800
Modeller, Pottery and Porcelain models
Tube and Rod Drawer (Glass)
pottery or porcelain ware, according to
drawings, patterns, specifications or by
Tube and Rod Drawer (Glass) draws glass
creating own designs, for use in preparing
into tubes and rods using solid iron rod or
moulds. Examines drawings or
blowpipe. Collects from Bubble Maker
specifications; mixes plaster-of Paris or
iron rod with molten glass heated to
clay with water and kneads mixture to
proper temperature at its end. Sticks
required consistency and texture; beats
molten glass on iron post held by Helper,
mixture with small flat wooden piece to
blows and transfers fibres of glass into rod
make it plastic; makes models by carving
of the Helper who walks with it; blows
plaster or clay, by shaping material on a
down tube to maintain air cavity to
potter’s wheel or by other methods. May
prepare tube of required thickness;
work from given designs or create his own
continues operation until tube or rod is
designs. May specialize in modelling
prepared.
particular type of products such as toys,
domestic or sanitary wares.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8181 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
Code 8181
Operators
VOLUME II B 464
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant metal trays with trowel, roller, or palette
Operators knife to form smooth, level bed for glass.
Sets sections of glass on trays and
8181.1200 positions trays in kilns, using tongs.
Furnaceman, Glass/Furnace Observes glass through peepholes in kilns
to detect signs of warping, bubbling,
Operator
cracking, or blistering. Removes trays after
specified period of time, and stacks trays
Furnaceman, Glass; Melter, Glass
for gradual cooling and annealing in leer.
operates gas, oil, coal, coke, or electric
furnace to melt ingredients such as sand,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
soda, potash, borax and broken glass for
Code 8181
making required type of glass articles.
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
Feeds or directs feeding of premixed
Operators
ingredients to furnace; heats furnace and
maintains temperature at correct level
8181.1500
with aid of instrument controls or by
sight; checks and ensures that melting Kilnman, Pottery and Porcelain
process of ingredient in furnace pot is
proceeding correctly and to required Kilnman, Pottery and Porcelain operates
consistency; collects sample of molten kiln for baking pottery and porcelain ware
glass for laboratory analysis; maintains to proper hardness or heating glazed or
record of batches of mixture melted; decorated articles to obtain requisite
cleans melting pot periodically and shining and hard surface. Lights or
examines furnace walls for worn spots supervises lighting of fires in kiln,
and leaks. May skim surface of molten regulates feeding of fuel and adjusts
glass to remove impurities, using rake. draught to maintain proper temperature,
May specialize in operating particular type observing temperature indicators and
of furnace such as Melting Pot, Tank decides when baking is completed.
Regenerative or Recuperative tanks. May ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
specialize in melting glass for different Code 8181
types of glass material such as ordinary, Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
optical, sheet glass or for flasks. Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 8181.1600
Code 8181 Kiln Loader, Pottery and Porcelain
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
Operators
Kiln Loader, Pottery and Porcelain loads
pottery and porcelain ware in kiln for
8181.1400
baking and hardening. Places green
Annealer (Glass Product) pottery and porcelain wares in saggers
Annealer (Glass Products) tends gas or (fire clay boxes) or in kiln furniture
electric kiln to affix paint on glass: Ignites (refractory slabs or trays with intervening
and regulates gas burners to heat kiln to posts) ensuring that glazed surfaces do
prescribed temperature, or regulates not touch each other; carries saggers into
thermostat to control temperature of kiln and stacks them around interior in
electric kiln. Spreads plaster of Paris on prescribed manner giving support to
VOLUME II B 465
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
articles to prevent them from falling and KILN BURNER; FIELD-KILN BURNER;
utilising all available space inside kiln RETORT KILN-MAN or according to
leaving enough space between individual product-burned BRICKKILN BURNER;
piles of saggers for flame to circulate ROOFING TILE BURNER. May operate
around them for proper and uniform continuous or intermittent firing kiln.
heating or baking of material; closes and
seals kiln doors to prevent escape of heat. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
May unload baked articles when kiln cools Code 8181
down to required temperature. May feed Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
fuel (coal) and fire kiln. Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 8181.1800
Code 8181 Kiln Loader, Brick and Tile
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
Operators
Kiln Loader, Brick and Tile loads green
bricks, tiles and such other clay products
8181.1700
in kiln for baking. Stacks products such as
Kilnman, Brick and Tile blocks, bricks, and roofing tile, in specified
patterns in periodic kilns for burning;
Kilnman, Brick and Tile; Kiln Burner; Baker spaces and levels setting rings in kiln to
(Brick and Tile) controls periodic, field or facilitate circulation of air about products
retort kilns to bake clay products, such as during burning; spreads sand on floor or
brick, sewer pipe, clay refractories and setting rings to prevent cohesion of
roofing tile to proper hardness. Checks products during burning; lifts and
that articles for baking are sufficiently positions products on setting rings, using
dried and hardened; directs Kiln Loaders, hoist or manually with resistance of
Brick and Tile to load articles in kiln by helpers; examines products for cracks and
piling them one above other; seals kiln discards defective products; closes kiln
door with bricks and daubs brick with clay door and seals it with clay to prevent
to prevent loss of heat, using trowel; escape of heat. May unload baked articles
opens full valves and lights gas or oil, fires when kiln cools down to required
using oil soaked stick or supervises its temperature. May feed fuel and fire kiln.
firing according to firing schedule May assist Kilnman in regulating draught
depending upon articles to be baked. to kiln chamber.
Observes thermometer and action of
pyrometric cones through peepholes or ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
removes objects from kiln with tongs and Code 8181
examines it to determine rate of burning; Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
turns gas or oil valves and dampers to Operators
adjust rate of burning or baking of objects; 8181.1900
closes fuel valves and fire-boxes, opens
Bricklayer (Brick and Tile)
kiln-crown holes and installs fans to cool
objects. Instructs Kiln Loaders to unload
Bricklayer (Brick and Tile) repairs and
baked articles when kiln cools down to
rebuilds tunnel, periodic, and shuttle kilns
required temperature. May be designated
used to burn tile, brick, and sewer pipe:
according to type of kiln operated as DRY-
Examines kilns after burning cycles to
VOLUME II B 466
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
determine need for repair. Lays firebrick potash, cullet and mixes them in
to construct casing walls, flues, feather prescribed quantities according to
walls, and burner wickets, using mortar, formula; dumps ingredients in revolving
trowels, plumbobs, hammers, and brick. drum of machine using hand shovel; adds
Spreads plastic refractories over exposed colouring ingredients to Mixer where
brickwork to protect against deterioration necessary; closes lid of drum, starts
by heat. Lays brick flooring in periodic machine and allows machine to rotate
kilns. drum for set period for uniform mixing;
collects batch samples for laboratory
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: tests; stops machine when mixing is
Code 8181 complete; opens lid of drum and empties
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant contents into receptacle placed below;
Operators places batch near furnace for melting;
maintains record of number and nature of
8181.2000 batches mixed during shift; keeps
surroundings clean and tidy. May oil and
Graduating Machine Operator
clean machine. May feed furnace with
(Glass)
batch mixer.
Graduating Machine Operator (Glass);
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Graduator, Glass sets and operates
Code 8181
graduating machine to scratch
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
measurements on wax-coated glass
Operators
measuring appliances or apparatus. Places
apparatus in position on machine;
8181.2200
calculates gear combinations to obtain
Abrasive Mixer
specified graduating intervals on
apparatus, and sets machine accordingly;
starts and operates machine to cut or Abrasive Mixer tends mixing machine to
scratch graduations on apparatus; stops make abrasive compounds for use in
machine and readjusts graduating making, grinding, polishing and buffing
intervals to ensure proper graduation. wheels and hones. Calculates amount of
grit, clay and adhesive required according
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: to formulas. Weighs out ingredients,
dumps them into mixing machine and
Code 8181
starts mixing machine. Feels mixture and
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
adds water and resins until specified
Operators
consistency is attained. Scoops mixed
compound into oscillating sieve to screen
8181.2100
out lumps and oversized granules. Dumps
Batch Mixer (Glass)
compound into barrels for further
processing. Records quantities of
Batch Mixer; Mixingman (Glass) weighs
ingredients used in each mix. May operate
ingredients such as sand, soda, potash,
mixing machine for making ceramics and
cullet (waste glass) in prescribed
like products.
quantities and mixes them in revolving
drum for melting into glass. Collects
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
required ingredients such as sand, soda,
VOLUME II B 467
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Code 8181 fineness; stops machine and tilts cylinder
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant to remove ground material or watches
Operators delivery of slurry through delivery-end
while machine is in operation. May be
8181.2300 designated according to material ground
Mixing Machine Operator or industry in which worked such as
SLURRY MILLER (CERAMICS or CEMENT
(Abrasive)
MILLER). May tend one or more grinding
mills.
Mixing Machine Operator (Abrasives)
mixes various ingredients according to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
formula in mixing machine for making
Code 8181
abrasive mixture. Collects required
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
ingredients from nearby bins and fills
Operators
mixing bowl of machine with prescribed
quantities by opening and closing valves.
8181.2500
Starts machine to turn paddles in mixing
bowl; runs machine for specified period or Pug Mill Operator (Ceramics)
until ingredients are thoroughly mixed.
Stops machine and drains mixture from Pug Mill Operator; Pug Mill Attendant
bowl. Cleans machine using compressed (Ceramics) operates a machine (Pug mill)
air at end of shift. that mixes clay with water to knead it into
a suitable plastic condition for moulding
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: clay or porcelain articles. Sets appropriate
Code 8181 die to pug mill according to clay slab and
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant round required; starts machine to
Operators regulate speed of shafts provided with
helical knives to rotate in opposite
8181.2400 direction thus press clay towards exit into
granular condition which is subjected to
Ball Mill Operator (Cement and
further mixing in lower chamber; feeds
Ceramics)
cakes of filter pressed clay into mixing
chamber of machine by hand or opens
Ball Mill Operator; Ball Mill Attendant;
slide gate and valve to permit dry clay and
Miller (Cement and Ceramics) operates
water to flow into mixing chamber in
ball mill for finally grinding clay, rock,
specified proportion; examines clay for
clinker etc. into slurry (thin paste or semi-
consistency as it leaves machine and
fluid mixture), powder and cement;
regulates valves to change proportion of
checks that pebbles or balls, are filled in
water to clay as required; collects pressed
cylinder; feeds cylinder with requisite
and cut clay slab as ejected by machine.
amount of material and water through
Cleans and oils machine. May make minor
opening or regulates feed and flow of
repairs to machine.
water by manipulating valves of mill;
adjusts air-drift when grinding rock of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
clinker into powder or cement to avoid
Code 8181
jamming or choking; closes opening, starts
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
machine and runs it for specified time
Operators
ensuring grinding of material to required
VOLUME II B 468
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8181.2600 magnets to remove foreign particles and
Shaving Machine Operator sludge using hose. May mix clays
according to formula. May undertake
(Abrasive)
minor repairs to machine. May operate
Ball Mill to make slurry.
Shaving Machine Operator (Abrasive)
dresses abrasive material to required
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
shape and size using shaving machine and
Code 8181
traversable cutter or shaver. Selects
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
template according to article to be
Operators
finished; places abrasive article on
rotating platform of machine; selects
8181.2800
required type and size of blade according
to nature of dressing desired and fits it to Glaze Maker
tool holder of movable arm of machine;
starts machine to rotate wheel; adjusts Glaze Maker mixes, grinds, fuses and
the centring of abrasive article pushing by regrinds ingredients such as borax, lead,
hand to correct position; lowers arm of sand and lime to make glaze. Weighs out
machine fitted with shaving blade and materials, dumps these into grinding mill
depresses it slowly on article to trim edges and grinds them for specified time. Drains
and other area to desired shape and size; out mixture, passes it through screens and
removes shavings at frequent intervals by heats it in kiln for prescribed period to
blowing compressed air; measures article fuse it. Regrinds fused material into fine
with callipers, gauges, etc., to ensure powder and mixes it with water to form
conformity with specification; cleans stop for use in dipping processes.
machine with compressed air at end of
shift. May work from blue prints. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8181
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
Code 8181 Operators
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
Operators 8181.2900
Edge Operator (Abrasive)
8181.2700
Slip Maker (Ceramics) Edge Operator (Abrasive) trims and
Slip Maker (Ceramics) operates mixing smoothens edges of abrasive wheels over
machine (blunger) in which different kinds grinding machine. Mounts abrasive wheel
of clay is mixed into their semi-liquid form or article to spindle of machine either
(slip) for making ceramic products. singly or in packs; aligns wheels and
Regulates flow of materials into mixer; fastens article securely by tightening nuts
starts mixer and allows it to run for and bolts. Selects required type of star
specified time, pumps slip over magnets dresser wheel; slides star dresser wheel to
to remove any iron or steel particles and machine groove so that it faces emery
through filter process to remove excess wheel to be trimmed; starts machine by
water, regulating flow by means of a pressing electric button and sets speed of
valve; cleans filters and magnets with machine to rotate abrasive wheel at
water as required; washes screens and required speed; moves by hand dresser
VOLUME II B 469
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
wheel along groove, forward and Burner Cement
backward to trim edges of wheels at set
speed; trims and smoothens edges to Burner, Cement; Kiln Man, Cement
required specifications by stopping operates cylindrical leaning kiln rotating
machine at frequent intervals and on an inclined axis to burn slurry, (thick
checking size and shape of material with mixture of lime stone and other raw
measuring instruments; cleans article and materials) into clinkers for manufacture of
machine with compressed air to remove cement. Lights kiln furnace and supplies
dust and powder. pulverised coal mixed with compressed air
or high pressure air through feed pipes to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: burn slurry at required temperature;
Code 8181 operates switches and controls levers at
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant panel board at Burners platform to rotate
Operators kiln at set speed and to open supply
channel of slurry into kiln and regulate
8181.3000 flow of slurry in rotating kiln to get it
Wet Disk Operator (Abrasive) calcined and burnt into cement clinker
(hard mass of burnt clay and stone);
observes intensity of flame, its colour and
Wet Disc Operator (Abrasive); Disc
progress of burning of moving clinker
Grinder grinds and polishes sharpening
inside kiln to maintain required
stones and sticks, by hand on power
temperature by regulating coal and air
operated disc grinder. Presses switch
supply; notes and records various control
button to start disc grinding machine
panel readings; regulates proper amount
fitted with rotating grinding iron table;
of feed, speed of kiln, coal blast and
opens water tap and regulates its flow to
draught to ensure production of clinker of
fine jet over rotating table of machine; fills
right quality; visits frequently different
hopper with fine sand and opens its
sections of rotary kiln and coal grinding
bottom plate to allow slow and steady
mill for efficient performance; stops kiln, if
flow of sand over rotating table; places
any defect develops in any of its
object (sharpening stone or stick) on
auxiliaries such as cooler, drag chain,
rotating table and applies pressure as
clinker elevator, concentrator etc. May be
necessary to grind and polish it to
in charge of one or more rotary kilns.
required finish. Cleans article in water and
frequently checks it with measuring
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
instruments for size, smoothness and
uniformity; repeats process by increasing Code 8181
supply of sand and water as necessary; Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
cleans finished article in water; washes Operators
and cleans machine with water at end of
shift. 8181.3200
Clay Modeller
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8181 Clay Modeller moulds full-sized or scale
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant models of products, such as automobiles,
Operators automobile parts, television sets, radios,
8181.3100 washers, refrigerators, caskets, or boats
VOLUME II B 470
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
from clay following artist's sketches or Code 8181
from verbal instructions: Builds rough Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
lumber form to fit around model or Operators
centres preformed lath-covered wood
frame on grid platform. Kneads clay into 8181.3400
slots between laths so clay will adhere to Furnace Helper
frame. Moulds clay by hand to
approximate shape. Pulls sheet aluminium
Furnace Helper assists the Furnace
forming tool over surface of clay to shape
Operator by performing tasks like sealing
areas that have constant cross sections.
the furnace using paddle and shovel and
Shapes sculptured surfaces, using various
charging the furnace with material like
types of sculptor's tools and scrapers.
scrap, ore, pellets or coke. Observes
Verifies uniformity and smoothness of
gauges and manipulates controls on
curved surfaces with splines and sweeps.
panel. Signals Overhead Crane Operator,
Scrapes clay from high areas and builds up
or uses electric hoist, to position ladles or
and smooths low areas to attain desired
buckets near furnace, and moves levers to
shape. Cuts cardboard templates for use
tilt furnace into pouring position. Skims
as guides to shape symmetrical sections.
slag from molten metal, using bar, rabble
Takes measurements from completed half
or ladle. Also performs cleaning duties.
of model and duplicates them on
unfinished half to make both sides
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
symmetrical. Covers bumpers, lights, door
Code 8181
handles, and other parts with aluminium
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
foil to simulate chrome or coloured glass.
Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8181.9900
Code 8181
Glass and Ceramics Plant
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
Operators, Other
Operators
8181.3300
Glass, Ceramics and Related Plant
Fibreglass-Machine Operator
Operators, Other include all other
operators engaged in glass, ceramics and
Fibreglass-Machine Operator operates
related plant operation activities not
machine to spray melted glass fibres onto
elsewhere classified.
products, such as boat hulls and lawn
furniture: Feeds strands of raw fibreglass
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
into machine, monitors gauges, and
Code 8181
moves controls to obtain specified
Title Glass and Ceramics Plant
temperature, pressure, and flow rate of
Operators
molten glass through spray jets onto
article to be coated. Cleans and adjusts
Family 8182
machine, according to maintenance
schedule or instructions from supervisor,
Steam-Engine and Boiler Operators
using hand tools and prescribed cleaning
agents.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 471
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Steam Engine and Boiler Operators 8182.0200
maintain and operate various types of Boiler, Attendant
steam engines, boilers, turbines and
auxiliary equipment to provide power and
Boiler Attendant operates boilers to
other utility services for commercial,
generate steam of required pressure by
industrial and institutional buildings, at
controlling and adjusting water feed,
work sites and aboard ships or self-
draught, evaporation, fire, etc., for heat or
propelled vessels.
power. Opens water-pipe valve in tank
through glass tube attached to it and
8182.0100 closes water-pipe when boiler tank is filled
Boiler, Tindal with water to required level. Ensures that
water level in indicator is always above
Boiler Tindal; Head Boiler Attendant sets minimum limit. Opens door of fire
automatic draught controls, guides chamber of boiler, shovels fuel into fire
feeding of fuel in hopper, pumping of box and rakes fire to obtain maximum
water and all other operations in boiler heat or sets device which feeds gas, oil or
house. Checks visually and by reading the other fuel automatically. Checks
meters regarding steam load and temperature and pressure of steam by
pressure, condition of combustion in reading gauges and feeds fuel or adjusts
furnace, quality of fire and water feed stoking accordingly. Operates different
system etc. Ensures that water level supply valves and ensures that steam is
indicators are in working condition. supplied to engine room at prescribed
Ascertains draught (air supply to fuel) and pressure. Controls air draught into boiler
exhaust requirements to boilers, making ensuring correct adjustment of air supply
necessary manual and mechanical and preventing infiltration of extraneous
adjustments for control and regulation. air. Maintains water level and steam
Ensures that adequate fuel is stored, pressure as prescribed. Drains out excess
exhaust temperature of flue gas (the water from drum by blowing down
gaseous products of combustion from according to instructions or in presence of
boiler furnace and water vapour) remains shift-in-charge. Undertakes cleaning of
within specified limits, feeders are boiler tube ways and minor repairs,
uniformly filled with fuel and that all fuel maintains general external cleanliness,
is completely burnt. Checks ash contents lubricates mechanical parts of boiler and
visually or by chemical analysis or by assists in commissioning, banking
reading carbon dioxide recorder. Ensures (reducing the rate of combustion in boiler
continuous and proper working of ash furnace by covering fire with slack or fire
disposal system and cleaning of boiler coal) and shutting down boilers. Maintains
tube ways. Conducts general supervision prescribed records of readings in log book.
of other operations in boiler house to May cut off automatic water feed and
meet load demand on plant. May handle make direct connection to drum and blow
equipment in emergency. off excess water in case of emergency.
May remove ash from ash pan or slag
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: from slag chamber. May clean boiler and
flues. May operate boilers with different
Code 8182
fuels such as gas, oils, coal and be
Title Steam-Engine and Boiler Operators
designated accordingly.
VOLUME II B 472
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: hopper and removing ash and cinder
Code 8182 discharge from boiler, cleaning and
Title Steam-Engine and Boiler Operators scrapping off scales from boiler, operating
and undertaking maintenance of boiler
8182.0300 feed pumps, operating boiler draught
fans, operating conveyors for supply of
Boiler, Fireman
coal to storage bunkers of boilers, looking
after performance of deaerator in order
Boiler Fireman; Fireman, Steam shovels
to remove dissolved gases from boiler
coal into boiler to generate steam of
feed water etc., and are designated as
required pressure. Lights boiler by
Coal Trimmer, Ash Mazdoor, Ash Khalasi,
throwing lighted cotton waste into boiler
Boiler Khalasi, Coal Conveyor Attendant
furnace and supplying air into chamber for
etc., according to nature of work
easy combustion of coal. Shovels coal into
performed.
fire chamber of boiler and spreads it
evenly on surface for maximum
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
combustion and utilisation of heat to
Code 8182
generate steam. Pokes or rakes burning
Title Steam-Engine and Boiler Operators
coal with metal rod to drop burnt cinder
and ash on floor and to break lumps of
8182.0500
coal to ensure maximum use of coal in
chamber and maintain uniform heat. Serang, Engine Room/Engine Bosun
Ensures that water supply to boiler is
constant and at prescribed level. Checks Serang, Engine Room controls and directs
temperature and pressure of steam by work of engine room crew on board ship.
reading gauges and adjusts steam Allocates duties to engine room crew; and
pressure by regulating feed of coal and ensures that engine room, floor plates
water to boiler. Lubricates moving parts. and paint work have been properly
Maintains record of supply of coal to cleaned, and spares are properly greased
boiler etc. May collect, carry and dump and stored; supervises work of Tindal,
ash at control point. May use bagasse Engine Room; Stoker, Ship; assists ships'
instead of coal specially in sugar factories. engineers in maintenance work and
May clean water tubes and dismantle supervises cleaning of boilers, washing of
boiler for repairs. tank tops, chipping and scrapping in
engine-room etc.; maintains discipline
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: amongst engine room crew. May perform
Code 8182 duties of Tindal or Stoker in emergency or
Title Steam-Engine and Boiler Operators when required.
8182.0400 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Boiler House Operatives Code 8182
Title Steam-Engine and Boiler Operators
Boiler House Operatives perform number
of routine and low skilled tasks in
8182.0600
operating boilers such as breaking coal to
required size by hand, picking out shells Tindal, Engine Room
and stones from coal, looking after
automatic disposal of ash from boiler
VOLUME II B 473
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Tindal, Engine Room supervises work of for journey by firing boiler to required
engine room crew under instructions from steam pressure.
Serang, Engine-room. Assists ships'
engineers in looking after satisfactory ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
functioning of boilers; stands watch in
Code 8182
engine-room, supervises firing of boilers
Title Steam-Engine and Boiler Operators
and sees that water level of boilers is
maintained correctly. May work with
8182.9900
engine-room crew in cleaning boilers,
Ships’ Engine Room Ratings, Other
paintings, chipping etc.; may assist
engineers in overhauling and maintenance
Ships' Engine Room Ratings, Other include
of machinery, engines and boilers; may
all other Ratings engaged in various
perform duties of Serang in his absence.
operations in ship's engine room, not
elsewhere classified.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8182
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Steam-Engine and Boiler Operators
Code 8182
Title Steam-Engine and Boiler Operators
8182.0800
Family 8183
Fireman, Locomotive
Packing, Bottling and Labelling
Machine Operators
Fireman, Locomotive; Fireman, Railway
Engine (Steam) fires and operates steam
locomotive boiler by stocking coal into it Packing, Bottling and Labelling Machine
to maintain required steam pressure. Operators operate and monitor machines
Checks safety plugs of fire-box, moving which weigh, pack and label various
parts of engine and supply of water and products, or fill different containers with
coal before commencement of journey. products.
Stokes coal judiciously into firebox of
boiler to maintain constant fire for 8183.0100
generating steam and keeps coal Building Insulator, Machine
consumption within prescribed limits.
Assists Engine Driver in observing signals
Building Insulator, Machine blows and
and other instructions. Oils and cleans
packs insulating material, such as mineral
engine parts, fills water tank en route with
wool, shredded cork or asbestos with
water at water columns and maintains
power driven machine into cavities
required water level in boiler. Ensures
between walls, floors and ceilings in
correct operation of Engine lubricator and
buildings. Carries hose nozzle to working
raking of fire at waiting stations when
position. Inserts hose nozzle into openings
engine takes water. Is designated as FIRST
in floors, walls or ceilings and gets blower
FIREMAN or SECOND FIREMAN according
started to release compressed air which
to degree of responsibilities and tasks
blows insulation material through hose
performed and as FIREMAN LOCO SHED if
into them. Directs hose nozzle to
engaged in storing prescribed quantity of
distribute insulating material as specified.
coal, water etc., in engine and preparing it
May insulate open spaces, such as
cupboards, walls or attic, roofs by nailing
VOLUME II B 474
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
sheets of insulating material to studs or ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
rafters. Code 8189
Title Stationary Plant and Machine
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Operators Not Elsewhere Classified
Code 8183
Title Packing, Bottling and Labelling
Machine Operators 8189.0200
Gem Polisher, Machine
Family 8189
Gem Polisher, Machine polishes top
portion and gives facets to stone. Fixes
Gem and Jewellery Machine
stone to be polished in dop with shellac.
Operators Sets dop in tank (wooden rectangular
device to hold dop) or holds dop in special
The Gem and Jewellery Machine type of clamp. Starts machine, applies
Operators grind, cut, slice and polish gem diamond powder to revolving steel disc
stones to deliver perfect cut roughs. They and holds tank or clamp on it to press and
operate machine such as CAM Machine, polish stone to required finish. Checks
Laser Sawing Machine, Casting Machine, stone frequently with magnifying glass
Symmetry Analyser and Pantograph while polishing to ensure required finish.
Machine etc. May wash polished stone in caustic soda
solution or keep it in lemon juice for
prescribed period to brighten it.
8189.0100
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Gem Grinder, Machine
Code 8189
Title Stationary Plant and Machine
Gem Grinder, Machine grinds precious
Operators Not Elsewhere Classified
stones to required shape and size by
machine. Fixes roughly shaped stone,
8189.0301
after sawing or cleaning, in dop (metal
device to hold stone) with shellac. Fixes CAM Machine Operator
dop in machine spindle and positions it in
centre. Places other stone in another dop CAM Machine Operator interprets the
and fixes it in hand-rod. Starts machine three-dimensional (3D) jewellery design,
and presses hand-rod with stone against feeds design parameters in the CAM
revolving stone in spindle to rough out machine and produces resin based
uneven surfaces. Checks stone frequently prototypes. The model prototype serves
while grinding with magnifying glass and as a sample for manufacturing jewellery
grinds it to required shape and size. Uses or components.
different types of dop according to shape
required. Is designated as DIAMOND Qualification Pack Details:
CUTTER or DIAMOND GRINDER if engaged QP NOS Reference G&J/Q2404
in grinding diamond. May use electrically QP NOS Name CAM Machine
operated disc type grinding wheel for Operator
grinding stones. NSQF Level 4
VOLUME II B 475
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 8189
Code 8189 Title Stationary Plant and Machine
Title Stationary Plant and Machine Operators Not Elsewhere Classified
Operators Not Elsewhere Classified
8189.0501
8189.0401 Casting Machine Operator
Laser Sawing Machine Operator
Casting Machine Operator converts wax
Laser Sawing Machine Operator needs to models to jewellery pieces through
cut the rough diamond along the marking investment casting process. The individual
by fixing it on a dop or cassette or holder, invests the flask and then operates semi
then slicing it using the laser machine. A to fully-automated machines to pour and
Laser Sawing Operator is responsible for regulate the flow of molten precious
delivering perfect cut roughs in the metal into cavities created by melted wax,
stipulated time, while minimizing weight to produce cast jewellery pieces on mass
loss and breakage. scale.
Qualification Pack Details: Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4404 QP NOS Reference G&J/Q2808
QP NOS Name Laser Sawing QP NOS Name Casting Machine
Machine Operator Operator
NSQF Level 5 NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8189
Code 8189
Title Stationary Plant and Machine
Title Stationary Plant and Machine
Operators Not Elsewhere Classified
Operators Not Elsewhere Classified
8189.0601
8189.0405
Symmetry Analyser Machine
Blade Sawyer
Operator
Blade Sawyer needs to cut the rough
diamond along the marking by fixing it on Symmetry Analyser Machine Operator
to a dop or pot, then slicing it using the uses the symmetry analyser machine (e.g.
blade sawing machine. A blade Sawing Helium Polish, Sarin Dimension),
Operator is responsible for delivering computer and a printer to generate a
perfect cut roughs in the stipulated time, report containing all the details of a
while minimizing weight loss and diamond’s cut which include crown
breakage. angles, table percentage, facet angles,
Qualification Pack Details: crown height percentage, girdle thickness
percentage, pavilion depth percentage,
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4404
etc. which help a polisher to check the
QP NOS Name Blade Sawyer
dimensions and repair.
NSQF Level 5
Qualification Pack Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4707
VOLUME II B 476
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
QP NOS Name Symmetry Analyser Title Jewellery and Precision Metal
Machine Operator Workers
NSQF Level 3
Sub Division 82
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8189 Assemblers
Title Stationary Plant and Machine
Operators Not Elsewhere Classified Assemblers assemble prefabricated parts
or components to form subassemblies,
8189.0701 products and equipment, according to
Pantograph Machine Operator strictly laid down procedures. The
products worked on may be moved from
Pantograph Machine Operator; Machine one worker to the next along assembly
Engraver operates pantograph machine lines.
for engraving letters and designs on metal Tasks performed by workers in this sub-
surfaces or object with rotary cutters by major group usually include: assembling
copying template (pattern). Cleans object components into various types of
to be engraved using soap water or other products and equipment, according to
cleaning substance and clamps it in strictly laid down procedures.
position under cutting tool of machine.
Fastens required type of pattern or design
in position under tracing arm of machine. Occupations in this Sub Division are
Adjusts length of tracing arm of machine classified into the following Groups:
to scale, depending on size of engraving
desired on object. Starts machine and 821 Assemblers
manipulates tracing arm by hand in order
of sequence to draw tracing point or
Group 821
styles over pattern or design for
simultaneous reproduction of engraving
Assemblers
or cutting by cutting tool on object
according to set scale. Stops machine
Assemblers assemble prefabricated parts
when pattern is traced and fully engraved.
or components to form subassemblies,
Removes engraved piece from table and
products and equipment, according to
cleans surface. May do minor repairs to
strictly laid down procedures. The
machine.
products worked on may be moved from
one worker to the next along assembly
Qualification Pack Details:
lines.
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4202
QP NOS Name Pantograph
Occupations in this Group are classified
Machine Operator
into the following Families:
NSQF Level 4
8211 Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 8212 Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers
Code 7313
VOLUME II B 477
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8219 Assemblers, Not Elsewhere Code 8211
Classified Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
8211.0101
Family 8211
Mechanical Sub-Assembly
Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
Technician
Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
Mechanical Sub-Assembly Technician
assemble, according to strictly laid down
assembles together the mechanical sub-
procedures, component parts of
systems. The individual at work is
mechanical machinery such as engines,
responsible for assembling mechanical
motor vehicles, turbines and aircraft.
modules from moulded, welded or forged
components to produce the final
8211.0100
mechanical sub assembly of the product.
Assembler, Workshop Machine and
Equipment Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q6304
Assembler, Workshop Machines and QP NOS Name Mechanical Sub-
Equipment assembles finished mechanical Assembly
components to form specific unit or Technician
machine such as lathe, grinder, milling NSQF Level 4
machine, pump etc. using hand tools and
machines. Studies drawing or sketch for ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
fitting and assembly details. Places
Code 8211
different finished metal components of
Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
machines like frames, cross members,
bearings, bottom and top plates, etc. on
8211.0200
floor and assembles them together in
Assembler Printing Machinery
prescribed sequence, using nuts, bolts etc.
Carries out further tooling, if necessary
Assembler, Printing Machinery assembles
while assembling. Fits different parts
and fits parts of printing machinery
together to form complete unit or part of
according to maker's specifications and
unit. Checks during assembly stages for
erection manual. Studies drawings and
accuracy of fitting and to correspond to
other specifications and consults erection
specifications. Finishes fitting and files off
manual. Examines foundation as per
edges or ends of parts where necessary
drawing for correct assembly and erection
using hand files, chisels etc. Tests either
and gets alterations done, if necessary.
finished main assembly or sub assembly
Makes arrangements for proper cleaning
parts for specified performance and
of different parts of machine and checks
makes necessary adjustment to parts
them for flaws and accuracy of fit, using
using hand tools. May install assembled
gauges, micrometres and other measuring
units at site or in factories for actual
instruments. Assembles parts step by step
running. May repair and overhaul
according to instructions, if necessary by
machines.
further tooling using power and hand
tools and checks for rigidity, proper fit and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
required functions. Synchronises
VOLUME II B 478
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
movements of corresponding parts and performance. Dismantles assembled
adjusts them to ensure stipulated machine for packing according to
performance. Tests assembled unit for markings. May erect machine at premises
operational efficiency and makes or factory. May overhaul and repair textile
adjustments where necessary. May drill machinery. May give electrical or power
holes, mark metal and perform other supply to machine. May work on sub
fitting operations, if necessary. May set assembly line and assemble sub units or
necessary devices in assembled unit to parts on work bench.
suit customer's needs.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 8211
Code 8211 Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
8211.0400
8211.0300 Assembler, Refrigerator and Air
Assembler, Textile Machinery Conditioning Unit
Assembler, Textile Machinery assembles Assembler, Refrigerator and Air-
textile machines from finished Conditioning Unit assembles and installs
components as member of team. Studies refrigerator and air-conditioning units by
drawings and collects details of assembly connecting pipes, insulating, lagging,
to be made. Collects or gathers frame, connecting compressor, etc. and ensures
structure parts, sub-assemblies etc. from attainment of desired temperature.
stores or nearby fixed points. Erects side Assembles frame or body of refrigeration
frames and fits cross frames and other or air-conditioning equipment by
joints. Assembles various other machine tightening respective parts with nuts,
parts of components to main frame, if bolts, rivets, hinges, etc. Insulates frame
necessary by further tooling, using nuts, and tank with insulating material such as
bolts, rivets, etc. in order of sequence. glass wool, cork, etc. fabricates
Ensures that stage assembly is accurate evaporator coils to required size and
and conforms to prescribed standards. shape depending on type and nature of
Fits up assembly parts like gear wheels, air-conditioning unit handled. Fits various
bottom rails, shaft assembly etc. as controls and accessories like expansion
detailed. Fastens or secures various parts valve and refrigerant controls as detailed.
and components like slide arm fitting, Connects copper or iron pipes to different
levers, slides, cams, springs, chain pulleys, units of segments and charges refrigerator
brackets etc. to position using screws, with gas or liquid as freezing medium.
nuts, bolts, rivets and other devices. Ensures conformity with specifications
Ensures that parts assembled are set to and prescribed performance of assembled
proper level. Finishes or smoothens unit. Installs assembled unit at premises
surfaces by scraping, filing, chiselling or and gives power connection to unit by
even welding. Makes punch marks or fitting necessary gadgets and adjusting
marks symbols on different assembled various controls to suit required freezing
parts for assembly of machine at site of or cooling temperature. May repair and
factory. Tests performance of assembled overhaul air-conditioning and refrigerator
machine by manipulating levers, gears, equipment. May install commercial air-
etc. to ensure accurate and prescribed conditioning equipment to premises and
VOLUME II B 479
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
rooms and make necessary changes to Code 8211
buildings to ensure air tightness. Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 8211.0600
Code 8211 Assembler, Stationary Diesel
Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers Engine
8211.0500
Assembler, Stationary Diesel Engine
Assembler, Stationary Petrol assembles stationary diesel engine from
Engine finished components, makes adjustments,
sets alignments, clearances etc. and
Assembler, Stationary Petrol Engine ensures stipulated performance. Places
assembles stationary petrol engine with diesel engine block on jig or other fixture
finished components, tunes engine and using hoisting equipment. Fits or
tests performance. Checks condition and assembles various parts to engine block
cleaning of various engine parts such as such as crank shaft, cam shaft, main
crankshaft, camshaft, connecting rod, bearing, connecting rods, timing gears
pistons, tappets, valves, valve guides, pistons, fuel pump, atomiser, automatic
spring etc. and measures appropriate timing mechanism, exhaust manifold
parts to assess serviceability, suspension, etc. using spanners,
reconditioning or replacement as wrenches, screw drivers and other special
necessary. Scrapes bearings, grinds valves, tools and devices. Collects various parts
files piston rings, assembles pistons with like nuts, bolts, washers etc. from nearby
connecting rods and fits camshaft, bins and fits or screws them to cylinder
crankshaft, fly wheel, cylinder block, head. Checks assembled units or parts at
piston assemblies, valves etc. according to every stage for prescribed accuracy,
design in order of sequence using hoisting alignment, tolerance etc. using special
device, stand, special tools and other tools. Records part number fitted or
implements ensuring necessary assembled to engine block and notes
movement and clearances as specified. factual details or position regarding
Sets valve timing, meshes timing wheels clearances, adjustments etc. made.
on cam and crankshafts and fastens Assembles other sub-assemblies like
cylinder head with gasket on cylinder starter, alternator timing chain, heater
block. Assembles and fits fuel pumps assembly switch, radiator etc. Places
lubrication and fuel pipes, sparking plugs assembled engine at central places for
etc. Fits distributor according to ignition engine test. May conduct engine test on
timing and makes electrical connections dynamo meter and note actual tuning
with battery, ignition coil, plugs cut out, conditions and make necessary
etc. Fits radiator, fan pulleys, water pump, adjustments. May overhaul and repair
etc. Sets tappets and starts engine. Tunes engines or other components.
engine and runs it for prescribed number
of hours. May test engine horse power, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
solder nipples, anneal pipes etc. May Code 8211
suggest alterations in fittings. Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 8211.0700
VOLUME II B 480
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Assembler, Tractor finished components by further tooling.
Examines drawings and specifications.
Assembler, Tractor assembles tractors and Checks parts and components to rectify
other earth moving equipment from faults if any and ensures accuracy. Checks
finished components and parts. Collects alignments, scrapes bearing, examines
or places at fixed points different and cleans parts, (openings) fits rotors
component parts, sub-assemblies etc. blades, nozzles, injectors, super heaters
required for assembling. Lifts by hand or valves, crankshaft, piston assemblies with
by hoisting equipment different frames, connecting rods, steam chest covers etc.
(upper and lower) body and other parts. as appropriate for turbine or steam
Fits parts together in set order using nuts, engine by further tooling as necessary.
bolts, rivets etc. and with necessary Sets glands and packing while fitting to
wrenches, spanners and other special prevent leakage of steam. Checks
tools. Checks at every stage assembled condenser and fits steam pipes according
parts for movement, performance etc. to drawing and insulates them by lagging
Attaches various mechanical parts such as to prevent loss of heat. Fits lubrication
brakes, steering assembly, fuel system, pipes and sets them to order. Adjusts
propulsion equipment, etc. Sets required valves, clearance etc. as prescribed. Sets
parts in machine for proper seating and timing and couples the turbine with
alignment. Sets alignments and adjusts alternator or steam engine with
required clearances. Mounts engine to generator. Adjusts governor, starts
vehicle giving necessary engine bed turbine or steam engine as appropriate
mountings and tightening with nuts and and balance them for power generation.
bolts. tests performance of engine and May drill holes, check and adjust boiler
other mechanical equipment at stationary fittings etc. if necessary.
position. May drive vehicles outside and
test performance. May repair and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
overhaul engines and other equipment. Is Code 8211
designated as ASSEMBLER AGRICULTURAL Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
MACHINERY if engaged in assembling
chaff cutter, husking, machine, ploughing 8211.0900
machine and such other agricultural Assembler Loco Engines
machines. May overhaul and set atomiser
for fuel spray into engine combustion
Assembler, Loco Engine; Erector,
chamber.
Locomotive; Fitter Loco Erection
assembles tender and local engine from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
finished components by further tooling
Code 8211 according to specifications. Sets frame of
Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers locomotive at level by manipulating jack
and using spirit level for correct
8211.0800 alignment. Aligns cylinder back cover, fits
Assembler, Turbine and Steam guide bearer to frame and marks
Engine alignment for necessary machining.
Assembles and fits slide bars of
locomotives by reaming, drilling, grinding,
Assembler, Turbine and Steam Engine
etc., ensuring specified measurements
assembles turbine and steam engine from
VOLUME II B 481
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
using micrometres, callipers, etc. Aligns secures machines tightly to foundation
wheels, and gets engine and boiler lifted bolts or fixtures and rechecks alignment
on frame. Fits wheels and expansion shoe and levelling to ensure correctness. Makes
according to alignment of boiler with adjustment if necessary and gets grouting
frame. Fits ash-pan to boiler, drills saddle of foundations done. Allows grouting to
bolt and reams reversing screws stand of dry up and adjust position of different
frame. Fits cab platform ejector, parts of machine for efficient operation.
lubricator, injector etc. to boiler. Gives necessary power supply to machine
Assemble cab with engine according to or connects machine to line shaft. May
specifications. Fits side rods and other run machine and observe performance.
motion parts of locomotive and sends it May assemble, repair and overhaul
for blow through. Couples motion parts, machines. May specialize in erecting
fits valves, front cover of cylinder and particular type of machine or equipment
steam chest permanently. Fits operating such as printing machine, lathe,
and sanding gear and sends locomotive pneumatic hammer, grinder, pumps, etc.
for testing. Rectifies erection defects
according to test reports and assembles ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
tender with locomotive. Code 8211
Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8211 8211.1100
Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers Assembler, Continuity
8211.1000
Assembler, Continuity assembles specific
Erector, Machine and Equipment finished parts, needing no further tooling
to form component or unit in proper
Erector, Machines and Equipment installs, sequence as member of team usually on
erects and changes lay out of machines mechanical conveyor. Sits as member of
and equipment in mills, factories, team on either side of moving conveyor or
workshops etc. according to instructions like arrangement carrying components or
or specifications. Studies drawings and lay units for further assembly. Keeps tools
out sketches of machines or equipment to and required components for assembly
be erected. Calculates available floor area handy, close to conveyor line. Collects
in relation to dimension of machines, incoming part or unit from conveyor line,
working space required etc. and marks fits allotted component to it using hand or
areas on floor for foundations of power tools as designed. Checks whether
machines. Guides construction of assembled and completed unit conforms
foundations and setting of foundation to specified standards using simple tools,
bolts and fixtures according to type of gauges, measuring instruments, etc.
machines to be installed and allows Places assembled unit, article or material
foundations to dry up and settle for on moving conveyor to be carried forward
required number of days. Places base or for further assembly or otherwise. May
holding device of machines through mark article with trademark or symbols
foundation bolts or on fixture one by one, using stampings. May keep account of
using lifting equipment and aligns and work attended to or assembled. May back
levels them with spirit level. Fastens or and label articles. May assemble domestic
VOLUME II B 482
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
appliances, office equipment, commercial door locks and other fittings. Lubricates
goods, machine parts etc. and be various moving parts of vehicle with
designated accordingly. grease or oil. May assemble only engine,
gear boxes, axles, hydraulic brake system
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: etc. in sub-assembly line and be
Code 8211 designated accordingly.
Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8211.1200 Code 8211
Assembler, Automobile Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
8211.1201
Assembler (Automobile) assembles
different parts and units of automobile, Vehicle Assembly Fitter
installs them on frame and makes
necessary connections, adjustment, Vehicle Assembly Fitter operates a variety
settings etc. according to specifications. of machine tools to assemble mechanical
Assembles engine, gear box, front and and electrical components for two
rear axles etc. individually according to wheelers, four wheelers and large
specifications and ensures their stipulated commercial vehicles. A Vehicle Assembly
performance. Places body frames, side fitter is one who is skilled in operating
members, supporting frames etc. in machine tools for conducting assembly
special jigs and secures them tightly by operations as per the required vehicle
fixing bolts and nuts to different parts. assembly norms. Assembly of components
Assists Spot Welder to spot weld body includes engines, transmission
frame. Fits front and rear axle to body and components, electrical and electronic
tightens with nuts and bolts. Collects circuits and components, dashboards,
various components and parts from sub- seating systems, wheels, doors etc. at the
assembly or from nearby bins and fits required locations and as per required
them to body or chassis as appropriate. vehicle type/batch
Lifts assembled engine manually or using
hoisting equipment carefully, places it Qualification Pack Details:
over engine frame of chassis and secures QP NOS Reference ASC/Q3601
it in position with bolts and nuts. Fits QP NOS Name Vehicle Assembly
clutch, gear box propeller shaft, etc. and Fitter
makes necessary settings and NSQF Level 4
adjustments. Gathers such parts like
radiator, alternator, water pump, ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
hydraulic/vacuum brakes etc. from nearby
Code 8211
sub-assembly line and fits them to vehicle.
Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
Makes necessary adjustments,
connections and alterations to fittings as
8211.1202
directed. Checks for wheel alignment
Fitter-Mechanical Assembly
using special equipment and makes
necessary adjustments to brakes. Delivers
Fitter-Mechanical Assembly marks out the
assembled vehicle to trim line for fitting of
material for the features to be produced,
upholstery, door and window glasses,
and then use hand tools, portable power
VOLUME II B 483
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
tools, manually operated machine tools it on idle test and rectifies any defects to
and shaping, fitting and assembly engine, clutch, gear box etc. noticed.
techniques appropriate to the operations Rejects defective parts and replaces them
being performed. The candidate will be with new ones. Rectifies defects indicated
expected to check the quality of the on road test by further settings and
workpiece, using measuring equipment. adjustments as necessary. Lubricates all
moving parts and points with grease gun.
Qualification Pack Details: May work on batch or line assembly and
QP NOS Reference CSC/Q0304 assemble various units like frame building
QP NOS Name Fitter-Mechanical fork assembly, wheel building, brake
Assembly assembly, clutch assembly, fuel tank
NSQF Level 3 fitting etc. May drive motor cycle on road
to test for efficiency.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8211
Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers Code 8211
Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
8211.1300
8211.1400
Assembler, Motor Cycle
Assembler, Frame, Aircraft
Assembler (Motor Cycle); Assembler
Fitter, (Motor Cycle) assembles motor Assembler Frame, Aircraft fits and
cycle, auto-rickshaw, scooter, etc. from assembles components of aircraft frame
finished components, makes necessary in jig. Studies drawings and selects parts
settings and adjustment and ensures their according to specifications. Marks, trims,
correct performance. Keeps various chamfers parts and assembles airframe
assembly parts in convenient bins near components in jig, doing supplementary
work table. Assembles motor cycle or tooling where necessary. Checks
scooter engine form various parts such as alignment, assembly fits, clearance, etc.
piston, crank shaft, valves, tappets etc. by using appropriate devices and precision
necessary tooling, settings and instruments and ensures correct setting,
adjustments and fits it securely with bolts Secures members temporarily with
and nuts on machine frame ensuring fasteners or by tack holding and marks
correct balancing and alignment. Fits parts locations for rivet holes. Drills, reams and
and components in prescribed order of countersinks holes in members for
sequence and assembles various units like subsequent riveting. May replace, repair
gear mechanism, clutch, kick starter, etc. and modify passenger galley and toilet
Makes necessary checks and adjustments structural parts. May check fuselage for
to fittings and to assembled units at every structural weakness and make necessary
stage using gauges, callipers and other repairs and modifications. May check
devices and ensures that fittings conform pressure seal for sealing aircraft cabins
to prescribed specifications. Gives various from leaks. May operate drilling, grinding
mechanical and electrical connections like and other workshop machines and replace
driving chain, control cable, control levers, or repair airframe parts.
switches to handlebar, magneto cables, oil
levels etc. to machine. Starts engine, runs ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 484
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Code 8211 components to make dry cells used in
Title Mechanical Machinery Assemblers flash lights, radios, telephones, etc.,
Obtains various components such as
empty zinc containers, moulded carbon
electrodes, chemical paste, card board
washers, metal caps for carbon rods, etc.
Family 8212 for making cells. Sets positive carbon rod
Electrical and Electronic Equipment centrally in zinc container and fills
container with prescribed quantity of
Assemblers
chemical paste with spoons. Allows paste
to solidify and fits card board washer
Electrical and Electronic Equipment
through sticking carbon road on open end
Assemblers assemble or modify, according
of container. Fits metal cap on carbon rod
to strictly laid down procedures,
and seals container top with plaster. Slips
components of electrical, electro-
paper covering over cell prepared. May
mechanical and electronic equipment.
pack dry cells in packets. May operate
automatic machines to assemble dry cells.
8212.0100
Battery Assembler ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212
Battery Assembler assembles various Title Electrical and Electronic
components to make complete storage Equipment Assemblers
batteries. Assembles negative and positive
plates of cell with wood or fibre 8212.0300
separators in between each pair of plates Battery Repairer
to form cell unit. Fits assembled cell-
plates in cell and covers each cell with lid.
Battery Repairer repairs used and
Places cell units in position in battery
defective storage batteries. Checks
casing and connects them by soldering
voltage, condition of container, sealing,
their terminals with lead rod. Fits lead
terminals etc. of battery and determines
caps over terminals, marks terminals with
specific gravity of electrolyte (battery
respective polarity signs and seals top of
solution) with hydrometer to ascertain
assembled battery with molten pitch. May
further serviceability. Charges electrolyte
fill assembled battery.
solution or brings it up to required specific
gravity by addition of acid or distilled
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
water as necessary for further service by
Code 8212 charging, if possible. Empties all acid from
Title Electrical and Electronic used up battery, melts and removes
Equipment Assemblers sealing pitch with gas torch, cuts off
connecting rods of cells with hacksaw and
8212.0200 removes battery plates from container.
Assembler Dry Cell (Battery Examines condition of cell plates,
Manufacturing) separators etc. and replaces defective
parts. Reassembles battery by fitting new
cell plates in position and pours hot pitch
Assembler Dry Cell (Battery
to seal cells within case. Connections cell
Manufacturing) assembles various
VOLUME II B 485
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
with new lead rods and solders extreme individual is also responsible for checking
ends with positive and negative terminals quality of connector assembly.
as designed. Pours appropriate quantity of
requisite strength in cells to submerge Qualification Pack Details:
battery plates and gets battery put on QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0115
charge. May charge the battery on electric QP NOS Name Cutting, Crimping
a charging equipment. and Connector
Assembly Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: NSQF Level 3
Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Equipment Assemblers Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic
8212.0400 Equipment Assemblers
Assembler, Electrical Accessories
8212.0402
Assembler, Electrical Accessories Electrical Assembly Operator
assembles mechanical parts of electrical
equipment, such as light sockets, Electrical Assembly Operator is
switches, terminal boards, and plugging responsible for make electrical
devices: Fits together parts, such as socket connections of control panel assembly.
bases, shafts, contact fingers, and springs, The individual at work mounts and installs
in specified sequence, using fixtures, and connects internal electronic modules
screwdrivers, and air nut runners. Tests devices and components on the control
actions of moving parts and listens for panel.
unusual sounds to detect defective parts
for faulty operation. Verifies completed Qualification Pack Details:
assembly against pictorial drawings.
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7306
QP NOS Name Electrical Assembly
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Operator
Code 8212 NSQF Level 3
Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212
8212.0401
Title Electrical and Electronic
Cutting, Crimping and Connector Equipment Assemblers
Assembly Operator
8212.0500
Cutting, Crimping and Connector Electric-Motor Winder
Assembly Operator is responsible for
cutting wire or manually or using Electric Motor Winder assembles and
machine, crimping wire and assembling tests electric motor and generator stators,
wire into the housing. The individual at armatures, or rotors: Inspects cores for
work operates the cutting machine, defects and aligns laminations, using
crimping machine and manually cuts wire hammer and drift. Files burrs from core
and completes connector assembly. The slots, using hand file, portable power file,
VOLUME II B 486
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
and scraper. Lines slots with sheet ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
insulation and inserts coils into slots. Cuts, Code 8212
strips, and bends wire leads at ends of Title Electrical and Electronic
coils, using pliers and wire scrapers. Twists Equipment Assemblers
leads together to connect coils. Taps coil
and end windings to shape, using hammer 8212.0700
and fibre block. Tests windings for motor-
Assembler Precision Instrument
housing clearance, grounds, and short
circuits, using clearance gauge, growler,
Assembler Precision Instrument fits and
spring-steel blade, telephone receiver,
assembles finished mechanical parts of
insulation tester, and resistance bridge.
precision instruments such as binoculars,
Winds new coils on armatures, stators, or
microscope level, cameras, gauges etc.
rotors of used motors and generators.
according to drawings by further tooling,
May rewind defective coils.
if necessary. Checks finished components
with micrometre, Vernier, slip gauges and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
other precision measuring instruments
Code 8212
and devices and assembles them step by
Title Electrical and Electronic
step in proper sequences according to
Equipment Assemblers
drawing using spanners, screw-driver,
adopters and other hand tools. Fits lenses
8212.0600
and metal or wooden accessories like
Calibrator, Electrical stand (tripod), holders, boxes etc. as
specified. Checks whether assembled
Calibrator, Electrical assembles parts of units conform to specifications, replaces
electrical apparatus such as coils, faulty units or components and ensures
condensers, etc., to determine capacity stipulated performance and sensitivity by
for passing current. Selects electrical wire standard tests. May repair precision
of prescribed or required resistance and instruments. May perform minor machine
makes coils of specified number of turns operations on instrument makers' lathe or
of length in coil winding machine. Dries drilling machine. May be designated
coils in annealing chamber for required according to type of instrument
period. Dips coil in paraffin wax bath to assembled.
make it water proof. Solders specified
length of copper wire to two terminals of ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
coil using electric soldering iron. Measures Code 8212
resistance capacity of coil by connecting Title Electrical and Electronic
leads of coils to meter (galvanometer). Equipment Assemblers
Switches on and allows current to pass
through. Notes reading on meter and 8212.0800
ensures that it remains within permissible
Assembly Operator (Telephone
limits. Calibrates coils to prescribed scale
Equipment Manufacturing)
by soldering copper wire of varied lengths
and observing readings. Fits calibrated coil
Assembly Operator (Telephone and
to switch boxes and gives connection to
Telegraph Equipment Manufacturing.)
contact points. May fit and assemble
assembles finished components of
precision instruments.
telephones, switches, relays, etc. in order
VOLUME II B 487
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
of sequence, usually working on conveyor such as chassis, transistors, resistors,
belt system, into sub and final assemblies speaker, etc. and places them at
by soldering, screwing, painting and other convenient position on worktable. Cuts
minor machine operations to form prescribed lengths of electric wires of
complete unit. Feeds Bakelite case to different colours using, cutter, hand knife
conveyor belt, fixes cards to dial and puts or blade. Solders ends of wires to marked
cap line screws on key plate. Prepares, points according to wiring diagram, using
checks and fixes ringer coils, magnetizes suitable electric soldering iron. Assembles
magnet road, assembles bell hammer and various parts of wireless receiving set in
base plate, fits butter fly bracket and proper order to make different sub-
cradle switch, inserts plunger pastes, assemblies such as transformer switches,
diagram and performs other tests to make tuning controls etc., using pliers,
sub-assemblies by screwing, soldering, spanners, screw driver and other hand
minor machine operations and setting tools. Fits sub-assemblies securely to
parts together. Assembles and links chassis and ensures that all nuts and bolts
terminals, fixes ringer assembly, induction are and terminals of wires are properly
coil, condenser and dial block to base soldered to respective points. Selects
plate and wires and solders tag block. Sets appropriate types of electronic
tag block to base plate. Connects components and fits them to circuit board
induction coil, condenser, ringer and dial or plugs fitted to chassis. Gets assembled
block, wires spring combination, fits chassis checked for correctness. Fits
gauges, adjusts bell hammer and performs chassis in appropriate Fibre or Bakelite
other tasks as necessary. Fixes receiver, cabinet and securely holds it in position by
card, etc. and makes necessary fittings, tightening chassis bolts. Fixes various
adjustments and electrical connection to control knobs to complete receiving set.
form complete unit. May work at different May adjust and replace defective or
stages of assembly. improperly functioning circuitry and
electronics components, using hand tools
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and soldering irons. May test for efficiency
Code 8212 and performance. May be designated as
Title Electrical and Electronic METAL PARTS ASSEMBLER, CHASSIS
Equipment Assemblers ASSEMBLER, TRANSFORMER ASSEMBLER,
CABINET ASSEMBLER etc., according to
8212.0900 the stage and nature of work done.
Assembly Operator (Radio
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Manufacturing)
Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic
Assembly Operator (Radio
Equipment Assemblers
Manufacturing.) assembles various
components of radio set by fitting and
8212.1000
soldering parts together as designed to
Form Layer, Cable (Telephone
form sub-assemblies and fits them to
printed circuit board following Equipment Manufacturing)
specifications and using hand tools to
make complete wireless receiving set. Form Layer, Cables (Telephone and
Collects required components or parts Telegraph Equipment Mfg.) marks
VOLUME II B 488
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
dimensions on cable board and fixes nails Operator, Rack Wiring (Telephone
or jibs on it for making cables used in and Telegraph Equipment
selector racks, relay sets, etc. Studies blue
Manufacturing)
print and specifications of lay out of
cables to be formed. Marks different
Operator, Rack Wiring; Wireman, Rack
lengths, bends etc. on plywood sheet
Wiring (Telephone and Telegraph
cable board according to size and type of
Equipment Mfg.) assembles and wires
cable to be made. Drives nails or makes
selector racks, relay set racks etc., used in
small holes and screws standard pins
telephone exchange. Reads instruction
according to markings on cable board,
card and specification sheets. Assembles
following prescribed colour code and
on rack all components such as cable
different cable connections. May assist in
brackets, tag block bracket, shelf jacks,
making cables.
relays, fuse panels, buzz bars etc. Mounts
cables on rack and connects wires to tag
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
block according to specified colour code.
Code 8212
Solders contacts, squared wiring
Title Electrical and Electronic
formation and ties and laces cables with
Equipment Assemblers
waxed card using pliers, screw drivers,
soldering iron etc.
8212.1100
Cable Maker, Rack Wiring ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
(Telephone and Telegraph Code 8212
Equipment Manufacturing) Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers
Cable Maker, Rack Wiring (Telephone
Equipment Mfg.) forms insulated wire 8212.1301
cable by hand used in telephone RAC Assembly Operator
equipment. Studies specifications and
collects insulated wires of required sizes, RAC Assembly Operator assembles and
type and colour. Runs wires of connects together the various modules
appropriate colour through or over and parts of the refrigerator or air
different points in form laid on cable conditioner. The individual at work is
board. Checks for dimension and cuts responsible for assembling and wiring up
them at end points. Moulds and laces of various components, modules or sub-
wires together with waxed twine to make assemblies and systems to make the
cables. Puts correct tags on cable formed complete product.
and passes them for inspection.
Qualification Pack Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3501
Code 8212 QP NOS Name RAC Assembly
Title Electrical and Electronic Operator
Equipment Assemblers NSQF Level 4
8212.1200 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212
VOLUME II B 489
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Title Electrical and Electronic QP NOS Name Mechanical
Equipment Assemblers Assembly Operator
NSQF Level 4
8212.1401
Assembly Operator-TV ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212
TV Assembly Operator assembles various Title Electrical and Electronic
parts of the television to produce the set. Equipment Assemblers
Key parts may vary depending on the type
of television being manufactured, e.g., 8212.1601
CRT, LCD, LED. The individual at work is Manual Insertion Operator
responsible for fitting in the different
modules of the television set into the Manual Insertion Operator inserts
frame using appropriate screws and components on printed circuit board
connectors during the different stages of (PCB) as per the design. The individual on
the assembly process. The individual is the job is responsible for manually fixing
expected to minimise errors at every different electronic components,
stage since the assembly line is especially, in through-hole assembly of
continuously in motion components that cannot be inserted using
pick-and-place machine because of
Qualification Pack Details: reasons such as inconsistent shape or size
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q3502 or hand-soldering requirement.
QP NOS Name Assembly Operator-
TV Qualification Pack Details:
NSQF Level 4 QP NOS Reference ELE/Q5305
QP NOS Name Manual Insertion
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Operation
Code 8212 NSQF Level 3
Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212
8212.1501 Title Electrical and Electronic
Mechanical Assembly Operator Equipment Assemblers
Mechanical Assembly Operator assembles 8212.1602
all parts of LED luminary to complete the Through Hole Assembly Operator
product. The individual at work fits
together different electronic, electrical Through hole assembly operator inserts
and mechanical parts and connects them electronic components for assembling the
to make the final LED luminary as per printed circuit board (PCB), as per the
product design. design, either manually or through
automated machine. The individual on the
job is responsible for manually fixing
Qualification Pack Details: components using hand tools, operating
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q9201 and maintaining the automated insertion
VOLUME II B 490
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
machine used for placing different types loading, operating and maintaining the
of components on the through-hole PCBs. reflow-oven soldering machine.
Qualification Pack Details: Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q5101 QP NOS Reference ELE/Q5304
QP NOS Name Through Hole QP NOS Name Reflow-oven
Assembly Operator Soldering Operator
NSQF Level 3 NSQF Level 3
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212 Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers Equipment Assemblers
8212.1603 8212.1605
Pick and Place Assembly Operator Stencil Printing Operator
Pick and Place Operator operates the Also called ‘Stencil Masking Operator’ or
automated pick-and-place machine for ‘Screen Printer’, the Stencil Printing
assembling components on the printed Operator uses a manual or automated
circuit board (PCB). The individual on the stencil printer to apply solder paste on
job, programs, operates and maintains the printed circuit boards (PCB). The
automated pick-and-place machine for individual at work is responsible for
placing different types of components on applying solder paste on PCBs to be
the surface of PCBs for soldering. assembled with SMT components for even
soldering at the wave soldering or reflow
Qualification Pack Details: oven stage.
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q5102
QP NOS Name Pick and Place Qualification Pack Details:
Assembly Operator QP NOS Reference ELE/Q5201
NSQF Level 4 QP NOS Name Stencil Printing
Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: NSQF Level 3
Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Equipment Assemblers Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic
8212.1604 Equipment Assemblers
Reflow-oven Soldering Operator
8212.1606
Component Preparation Operator
Reflow-oven Soldering Operator operates
the reflow-oven soldering machine to
solder the components on printed circuit Component Preparation Operator forms,
boards after pick-and-place assembly. The bends and cuts the components to make
individual at work is responsible for them suitable for insertion on printed
circuit board (PCB). The individual on the
VOLUME II B 491
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
job is responsible for forming, bending Wire Bonding Operator is responsible for
and cutting the components’ extra leads, attaching the gold or metal wire to silicon
by using hand tools or machines to make die or micro-chip to lead frame or PCB.
them suitable for the through-hole The individual at work operates the
assembly. automated or semi-automated wire
bonding machine to connect the die or
Qualification Pack Details: chip to the lead frame or PCB through a
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q5202 micro length metal wire.
QP NOS Name Component
Preparation Qualification Pack Details:
Operator QP NOS Reference ELE/Q1702
NSQF Level 3 QP NOS Name Wire Bonding
Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: NSQF Level 4
Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Equipment Assemblers Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic
8212.1607 Equipment Assemblers
Box-building Assembly Technician
8212.1702
Box-building Assembly Technician Die Bonding Operator
assembles the electronics and electro-
mechanical modules and sub-assemblies Die Bonding Operator is responsible for
in an outer box or casing to complete the attaching the silicon die or micro-chip on a
products. The individual at work is lead frame or PCB, respectively. The
responsible for completing the product individual at work operates the
assembly by fixing sub-assemblies and automated pick-and-place machine to
modules, and connecting through routing attach the silicon die or chip on a lead
of cabling or wire harnesses. frame or PCB to either glue or solder
them. The silicon dies, lead frames and
Qualification Pack Details: solder are used for active components.
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q5306 The chip, conductive adhesive and PCB are
QP NOS Name Box-building used for LEDs.
Assembly
Technician Qualification Pack Details:
NSQF Level 3 QP NOS Reference ELE/Q1701
QP NOS Name Die Bonding
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Operator
Code 8212 NSQF Level 4
Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212
8212.1701 Title Electrical and Electronic
Wire Bonding Operator Equipment Assemblers
VOLUME II B 492
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8212.1801 Title Electrical and Electronic
Assembly Operator Capacitor Equipment Assemblers
8212.1803
Assembly Operator operates various
machines during the different steps of Vacuum Plant Operator
capacitor production and manufactures
the final product. The individual at work is Vacuum Plant Operator is responsible for
responsible for various processes such as operating the vacuum plant for metalizing
winding, flattening, protective taping, film and evacuating moisture from the
metal spraying, welding, resin filling and wound capacitor. The individual at work
baking at various stages of capacitor operates the vacuum plant to create
manufacture. vacuum for metalizing loaded films. The
individual also runs the vacuum plant for
Qualification Pack Details: removing moisture from wound
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0113 capacitors.
QP NOS Name Assembly Operator
Capacitor Qualification Pack Details:
NSQF Level 4 QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0104
QP NOS Name Vacuum Plant
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Operator
Code 8212 NSQF Level 3
Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212
8212.1802 Title Electrical and Electronic
Winding Operator Equipment Assemblers
8212.1804
Winding Operator winds film or wire on
core using automated or semi-automated Coating, Curing and Marking
winding machines for manufacturing Operator
capacitors or resisters. The individual at
work operates the semi-automated or Coating, Curing and Marking Operator is
programmed winding machine to wind responsible for spraying the capacitor
metal-alloy wire or metalized film on to a with zinc or aluminium oxide or dip-
core in the process of manufacturing a coating the resistor, stabilising the
resister or capacitor. The individual also capacitor or resistor through curing and
sample checks the resistance or marking the finished capacitor or resister.
capacitance of the winding. The individual at work operates the
Qualification Pack Details: spraying machine, curing furnace as well
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0101 as stamping machine or inkjet printer.
QP NOS Name Winding Operator
NSQF Level 4 Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0110
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: QP NOS Name Coating, Curing and
Code 8212 Marking Operator
NSQF Level 4
VOLUME II B 493
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 8212.1807
Code 8212 Manual Soldering Technician
Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers Manual Soldering Technician solders
connecting leads and components on the
8212.1805 capacitor coil or metal-top-assembly as
Masking Machine Operator per capacitor specifications. The individual
at work is responsible for soldering leads
Masking Machine Operator is responsible and components in the process of
for wrapping capacitors in Kraft-paper- manufacturing capacitor.
tape for further processing. The individual
at work sets up and operate masking Qualification Pack Details:
machine for covering capacitors with craft QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0105
paper tape for further processing. QP NOS Name Manual Soldering
Technician
Qualification Pack Details: NSQF Level 3
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0116
QP NOS Name Masking Machine ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Operator Code 8212
NSQF Level 3 Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212 8212.1808
Title Electrical and Electronic Wave Soldering Machine Operator
Equipment Assemblers
Wave Soldering Machine Operator
8212.1806
operates the wave soldering machine to
Pressing Machine Operator solder the assembled components on
printed circuit board (PCB). The individual
Pressing Machine Operator is responsible at work is responsible for setting up,
for making round capacitor flat, using operating and maintaining the wave
pressing machine. The individual at work soldering machine in order to solder the
sets up and operates pressing machines to different lots of assembled PCBs as per
make round capacitors flat. prescribed quality standards.
Qualification Pack Details: Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0106 QP NOS Reference ELE/Q5303
QP NOS Name Pressing Machine QP NOS Name Wave Soldering
Operator Machine Operator
NSQF Level 3 NSQF Level 3
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212 Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers Equipment Assemblers
VOLUME II B 494
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8212.1901 Sorting Operator sorts the resistors after
Welding Operator production according to the ohm value
and tolerance. The individual is
responsible for sorting the produced
Welding Operator welds the copper lead
resistors using automatic or semi-
wire to the resistor using welding
automatic methods according to their
machine. The individual is responsible for
ohm value and tolerance into separate
welding the electro-tinned copper lead
bins or boxes assigned with value range
wire to the centre of steel and cap,
marked
bonding to the resistor by welding
Qualification Pack Details:
machine.
Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0109
QP NOS Name Sorting Operator
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0102
NSQF Level 4
QP NOS Name Welding Operator
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic
Code 8212
Equipment Assemblers
Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers
8212.1904
8212.1902 Capping Machine Operator
Silicone Painting Operator
Capping Operator fixes the welded caps to
ceramic substrate by semi-automatic or
Silicone Painting Operator applies the
manual methods using toggle press
silicone paint to the resistor for colour
machine or hand tools. The individual at
coding. The individual at work is
work is responsible for cap punching by
responsible for applying the silicone paint
press fitting the welded caps to the
to the resistor by either automated or
ceramic rod for providing end terminals
manual method, drying it for few hours
on either side for winding, which is done
and baking in oven to make it permanent.
either manually or by semi-automated
methods using toggle press machine or
Qualification Pack Details:
hand tools.
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0108
QP NOS Name Silicone Painting
Qualification Pack Details:
Operator
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0107
NSQF Level 3
QP NOS Name Capping Machine
Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
NSQF Level 3
Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Equipment Assemblers
Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic
8212.1903
Equipment Assemblers
Sorting Operator
8212.2001
VOLUME II B 495
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Energy Meter Assembly Operator UPS Assembly Operator is responsible for
assembling and wiring up of various
Energy Meter Assembly Operator is components, modules or sub-assemblies
responsible for checking if the sensor is and systems to make the complete
functional and enclosing the PCB in the product. The individual at work assembles
outer case. The individual at work verifies and connects together the various
the functioning of the sensor of the meter modules and parts of the UPS unit.
and attaches the assembled PCB to outer
case. Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7301
Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Name UPS Assembly
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7304 Operator
QP NOS Name Energy Meter NSQF Level 3
Assembly Operator
NSQF Level 3 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Electrical and Electronic
Code 8212 Equipment Assemblers
Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers 8212.2101
Final Assembly Operator-Magnetics
8212.2002
PLC Assembly Operator Final Assembly Operator-Magnetics is
responsible for completing the assembly
of wound coils on lamination for SMPS
PLC Assembly Operator is responsible for
transformer, lighting coil or chokes. The
completing the printed circuit board (PCB)
individual at work fills the core, tapes and
and box assembly of the PLC components.
tests the assembly, applies varnish, marks
The individual at work assembles the
and packs.
power supply and micro-controller PCBs,
sends them for programming and
Qualification Pack Details:
completes the box assembly thereafter.
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q0114
Qualification Pack Details: QP NOS Name Final Assembly
Operator-Magnetics
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7305
NSQF Level 3
QP NOS Name PLC Assembly
Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
NSQF Level 3
Code 8212
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers
Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic
8212.2201
Equipment Assemblers
Assembly Operator–PMD and X-
8212.2003 Ray
UPS Assembly Operator
VOLUME II B 496
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Assembly Operator assembles all parts Module Assembly Technician
and modules of a patient monitoring
device (PMD) or X-Ray machine to Module Assembly Technician is
complete the product. The individual at responsible for fixing frames and junction
work fits together different electronics box in the solar module. The individual at
and electro-mechanical parts and modules work prepares the solar module for final
and connects them to manufacture the assembly, frames the module and fixes
PMD or X-Ray machine as per product the junction box with cables on the rear
design. side of the module. The individual is also
responsible for connecting the tabbing
Qualification Pack Details: wire from the module to the junction box
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7801 and soldering them.
QP NOS Name Assembly Operator
– PMD and X-Ray Qualification Pack Details:
NSQF Level 4 QP NOS Reference ELE/Q5802
QP NOS Name Module Soldering
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Operator
Code 8212 NSQF Level 4
Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212
8212.2202 Title Electrical and Electronic
Box Assembly Operator Equipment Assemblers
Box Assembly Operator assembles all the
assembled modules into the box, mould 8212.2302
or chassis to complete the medical device. Module Soldering Operator
The individual at work fits and connects
together all modules and sub-assemblies Module Soldering Operator is responsible
of the device in an outer casing or box of for connecting solar cells by soldering to
metal or plastic moulding to produce the form a solar module. The individual at
final product. work connects the positive end of a solar
cell to a negative end of another solar cell
Qualification Pack Details: by soldering and repeats the process to
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7802 interconnect all the required number of
QP NOS Name Box Assembly solar cells in an array to form the solar
Operator module.
NSQF Level 4
Qualification Pack Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: QP NOS Reference ELE/Q5801
Code 8212 QP NOS Name Module Assembly
Title Electrical and Electronic Technician
Equipment Assemblers NSQF Level 4
8212.2301 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212
VOLUME II B 497
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Title Electrical and Electronic Code 8212
Equipment Assemblers Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers
8212.2401
Electrical Technician 8212.2502
Drilling Operator
Electrical Technician is also called
’Electrical Sub-System Integrator’, the Drilling Operator: Also called ‘Punching
Electrical Technician integrates multiple Operator’, the Drilling Operator drills the
PCBs and power supply and other printed circuit boards (PCB) to make holes
electrical module into the product. The for inserting leaded components as per
individual at work integrates together the drilling specification. The individual at
modules and sub parts that form the work is responsible for drilling the boards
electronic system of the product. using machines and conducting X-Ray
quality checking of the PCBs to ensure
Qualification Pack Details: that drilling has been done according to
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q6301 the program, before passing it to panel
QP NOS Name Electrical Technician plating or stores.
NSQF Level 3
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212
Qualification Pack Details:
Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers QP NOS Reference ELE/Q2102
8212.2501 QP NOS Name Drilling Operator
NSQF Level 4
Inner Layer and Pressing Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Inner Layer and Pressing Operator cuts
Code 8212
the panels according to requirement,
Title Electrical and Electronic
forms the inner layers of multi-layer
Equipment Assemblers
boards pressing together to the outer
layers. The individual at work shears the
8212.2503
panels according to the desired size and
thickness for all board types, and forms Routing Operator
the inner layer of the panel by cutting,
laminating, performing oxide coating and Routing Operator is also called ‘Punching
finally pressing the laminates together to Operator’, the Drilling Operator drills the
form multi-layer boards. printed circuit boards (PCB) to make holes
for inserting leaded components as per
Qualification Pack Details: the drilling specification. The individual at
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q2101 work is responsible for drilling the boards
QP NOS Name Inner Layer and using machines and conducting X-Ray
Pressing Operator quality checking of the PCBs to ensure
NSQF Level 4 that drilling has been done according to
the program, before passing it to panel
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: plating or stores.
VOLUME II B 498
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
use in strategic products. The individual at
Qualification Pack Details: work is responsible for inserting electronic
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q2103 components into a PCB and soldering the
QP NOS Name Routing Operator components on to the board, which is
NSQF Level 4 then passed on to the sub assembly
integration team.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Qualification Pack Details:
Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic QP NOS Reference ELE/Q6303
Equipment Assemblers QP NOS Name Electronic Sub-
Assembly
8212.2504 Technician
NSQF Level 4
Solder Masking and Legend
Printing Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212
Solder Masking and Legend Printing
Title Electrical and Electronic
Operator is also called ‘Silk Screen
Equipment Assemblers
Operator’, the Solder Masking and Legend
8212.2701
Printing Operator is responsible for
PCB Assembly Operator
applying solder mask and printing of
artwork on the printed circuit board
(PCB). The individual in this job prints an PCB Assembly Operator manually inserts
epoxy-ink based solder mask using hand electronic components for assembling on
tools or coating machines and apply a printed circuit board (PCB) as per the
white letter marking to indicate design. The individual on the job is
component placing on each side of PCB. responsible for manually placing different
types of components on the PCB as per
Qualification Pack Details: the design requirements and then
soldering them.
QP NOS Reference ELE/Q2301
QP NOS Name Solder Masking &
Qualification Pack Details:
Legend Printing
Operator QP NOS Reference ELE/Q7804
NSQF Level 3 QP NOS Name PCB Assembly
Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: NSQF Level 4
Code 8212
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Electrical and Electronic
Equipment Assemblers Code 8212
Title Electrical and Electronic
8212.2601 Equipment Assemblers
Electronic Sub-Assembly Technician
8212.9900
Electrical and Electronic Equipment
Electronic Sub-Assembly Technician
inserts various components into bare Assemblers, Other
PCBs to obtain electronic sub assembly for
VOLUME II B 499
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Electronic Equipment Assemblers, Other greases important friction point. May
include workers who assemble the perform duties in sub-assembly of free
components or parts of electronic wheel mechanism, building and truing of
equipment, according to strictly laid down cycle rims, fitting of tyres and tubes,
procedures not elsewhere classified. mounting of pedal, etc. May assemble
tricycles, perambulators, etc.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8212 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Electrical and Electronic Code 8219
Equipment Assemblers Title Assemblers Not Elsewhere
Classified
Family 8219
8219.0200
Assemblers, Not Elsewhere
Assembler, Sewing Machine
Classified
Assembler, Sewing Machine assembles
Assemblers not elsewhere classified
sewing machine from finished
assemble, according to strictly laid down
components using jigs, fixtures, hand
procedures various products that do not
tools, gauges etc. Collects finished
include electronic, electrical, or
components from stores and sets them in
mechanical components.
order of fitting. Assembles different units
according to drawing or instructions using
8219.0100
jigs, fixtures etc. as necessary. Fits
Assembler, Bicycle
assembled units and other components
such as Crankshaft, Oscillating rock shaft,
Assembler Bicycle assembles different feed rockers, needle bar, lifter, bobbing
cycle components and parts to make housing driving wheel, handle etc. on
complete bicycle. Keeps or stocks body frame with bolts, nuts, screws etc. in
different components and parts such as order of sequence using hand tools, jigs,
frames, handles, pedals, mudguards, fixtures and other devices by further
wheels, washers, nuts and bolts at tolling if necessary. Checks alignments and
convenient position near work table. Fits makes necessary adjustments to ensure
different parts together to form units such free and easy working of each part. Fixes
as handle bars with brake attachment, shuttle race, needle plate, slide plate
front fork, rear and front wheel, etc. bobbing winder, etc. and gives finishing
Places cycle frame in special jigs and touches. Mounts completed unit on
fixtures and assembles different units like wooden base or stand according to type
handle bar, fork, wheel, driving chain, of machine assembled. Sets wound
mud-guards etc. using washers, nuts and bobbin, fixes needle and threads it. Tests
bolts to form complete cycle. Examines assembled machine by trial stitching and
and tests assembled units and cycle for ensure desired performance by further
correct alignment. Adjusts wheel nuts and adjustments if required. Cleans machine
screws for proper tension of driving chain, and oils moving parts. May assemble
free movement of wheels, proper specific parts in order of sequence and be
functioning of brakes, etc. as necessary. designated accordingly if engaged in mass
Tests performance of assembled cycle and production establishments.
makes necessary adjustments. Oils and
VOLUME II B 500
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Assembler, Metal Furniture
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8219 Assembler, Metal Furniture performs any
Title Assemblers Not Elsewhere combination of the following tasks to
Classified assemble metal furniture. Drills holes in
parts, such as backrests, covers, and seats,
8219.0300 using power drill and template. Fits parts
Assembler (Plastic Product) together and fastens them temporarily
with clamps and presses. Bolts, staples, or
screws parts together, using hand tools,
Assembler (Plastic Product) performs any
such as pliers, wrenches, pneumatic
combination of tasks involved in assembly
screwdrivers, and staplers. Rivets parts
of plastic articles, such as bags, baby
together, using hand or pneumatic
pants, coolers, fibreglass chairs,
hammer. Inserts such parts as casters and
containers, trays and inflatable toys.
scuff plates into holes or slots. Bends
Marks cutting lines on plastic sheet of
fastening devices and fits interlocking
sections to be assembled, following
parts together with hammer or rubber
template. Cuts sections from sheet, using
mallet or by striking parts against floor or
knife, scissors, or power cutting machine.
workbench. Applies cement to cushions
Positions sections on jig and aligns seams
and covers, using brush or spray gun, and
and air valves. Brushes glue along edges of
joins parts by hand. Pulls and fastens
section, seals edges with hot iron or
drawstrings, wires, or springs to join pre-
electric-sealing machine, and trims edges
cut upholstery covers to arm-rests, seats,
with scissors. Examines articles for
and other parts, using hand tools. Inserts
defects, such as smeared paint, cuts, and
drawers into slides and adjusts slides to fit
wrinkled seams. Fills inflatable article with
drawer surfaces. Packs furniture for
air and submerges it in water to detect
shipment. May bend metal parts, using
leaks. Positions plastic patch over leak and
bending machines.
fuses it to article, using electric sealing
machine. Cleans markings and dirt from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
article with solvent, folds article, and
places it in bag for shipment. Heats cooler Code 8219
brackets, using hot plate, and secures Title Assemblers Not Elsewhere
cooler, using bench fixture. Presses Classified
bracket into depressed section of cooler
to attach bracket. May record number of 8219.9900
articles packed. May sort plastic sheets in Paper Board, Textile and Related
bins. May seal decorative pieces of Products Assemblers, Other
adhesive-backed cloth on garment parts,
using automatic heat sealer.
Paperboard, Textile and Related Products
Assemblers, Other include workers who
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
assemble the components or parts made
Code 8219 from paperboard, textile, leather and
Title Assemblers Not Elsewhere related materials, of various types of
Classified products, according to strictly laid down
procedures not elsewhere classified.
8219.0400
VOLUME II B 501
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: prepare trains for hauling in mines and
Code 8219 control their movement.
Title Assemblers Not Elsewhere
Classified Occupations in this Group are classified
into the following Families:
Sub Division 83
Drivers and Mobile Plant Operators 8311 Locomotive Engine Drivers
8312 Railway Braker, Signal and Switch
Operators
Drivers and Mobile Plant Operators drive
and tend trains and motor vehicles, or
drive, operate and monitor industrial and Family 8311
agricultural machinery and equipment, or
Locomotive Engine Drivers
execute deck duties on board ship and
other water-borne craft.
Locomotive-Engine Drivers drive, or assist
Tasks performed by workers in this sub-
in driving, locomotive engines to transport
major group usually include: driving and
passengers and freight.
tending trains and motor vehicles; driving,
operating and monitoring mobile
8311.0100
industrial and agricultural machinery and
equipment; carrying out deck duties on Loco Driver, Mines
board ship and other water-borne craft.
Loco Driver, Mines operates electric or
Occupations in this Sub Division are diesel loco-engine to haul empty and
classified into the following Groups: loaded cars or tubs in mines on narrow
and winding tracks. Receives instructions
831 Locomotive Engine Drivers and on haulage destination of material. Checks
Related Workers engine equipment, audible signals, head
lights, warning bell or whistle,
832 Car, Van and Motorcycle Drivers
accumulator charge, etc. and ensures that
833 Heavy Truck and Bus Drivers
adequate quantity of sand is stored in
834 Mobile Plant Operators
sand chamber for releasing on track to
835 Ships’ Deck Crews and Related
have adequate grip. Ensures that cars or
Workers
tubs are coupled up together and linked
securely to engine to prevent tippling.
Group 831
Manipulates control levers and pedals to
Locomotive Engine Drivers and start, operates and stops loco engine as
Related Workers needed. Lubricates and makes minor
repairs to locomotive. May operate track
switch and couple and uncouple cars and
Locomotive engine Drivers and Related
locomotive.
Workers drive, or assist in driving,
locomotive engines to transport
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
passengers and freight, take charge of and
Code 8311
safeguard railway freight trains during
Title Locomotive Engine Drivers
runs, control the movement of railway
traffic by operating signals, switch rolling
stock and clean trains in railway yards,
VOLUME II B 502
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8311.0200 various parts of engine for operational
Driver, Railway Engine (Steam) efficiency. Ensures that engine contains
sufficient diesel and drives engine from
loco-shed to traffic yard or station for
Driver, Railway Engine (Steam) drives
attaching it to train with which booked.
steam engine of railway train on rail
Receives token for movement from
routes for transporting passengers and
Station Master and starts train on
goods. Takes charge of engine from Loco
receiving signal from Train Guard. Drives
Shunter. Examines various parts of engine
engine along scheduled route, regulating
for operational efficiency, drives engine
speed according to restrictions and
from loco-shed to station yard and
clearance of track and keeps to scheduled
attaches it to train. Ensures that first
timings. Exchanges signals with Train
coupling is properly fitted and all gauges
Guard en-route to maintain mutual
and meters are working properly. Opens
contact. Supervises work of Cleaner and
steam cock of vacuum ejector to create
checks operation of engine by observing
vacuum and receives token or line clear
readings of different gauges and
from Station Master. Whistles when
instruments. Drives engine to loco-shed
station signals become green or lowered
on completion of journey, fills up
to indicate readiness of engine to start.
necessary forms detailing required repairs
Starts train on receiving signal from
and hands over engine to Loco Foreman
Railway Guard. Drives engine along
or Loco-Shunter. Conducts running repairs
scheduled route at scheduled timings
in emergent cases. May also drive loco
regulating speed according to restrictions
engine (steam), or petrol driven rail car.
and cautions on railway. Exchanges signals
with Guard at each station after start to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ensure his presence in train. Supervises
and checks work of Fireman. Checks Code 8311
essential parts of engine, oils them after Title Locomotive Engine Drivers
along runs, ensures that engine contains
sufficient coal and water and recoups 8311.0400
deficiency at working. Drives engine to Driver, Railway Engine (Electrical)
loco-shed on completion of journey. Fills
up necessary forms, detailing major Driver, Railway Engine (Electric) drives
defects or required repairs and hands over electrically propelled railway engine on
engine to Loco Shunter. scheduled rail routes for transporting
passengers and goods. Takes charge of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: engine from Loco Shunter after examining
Code 8311 various parts of engine for operational
Title Locomotive Engine Drivers efficiency. Drives engine from loco-shed
to railway station and ensures proper
8311.0300 coupling. Receives line clear token and
Driver, Railway Engine, (Diesel) signal from Station Master and switches
on engine on receiving green signal from
Guard of train. Drives engine along
Driver, Railway Engine (Diesel) drives
scheduled routes, regulating speed
diesel engine of railway train transporting
according to restrictions and cautions on
passengers and goods. Takes charge of
railway track. Maintains arrival and
engine from Loco Shunter after examining
VOLUME II B 503
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
departure of train at stations to scheduled
timings. Exchanges signals with Guard Locomotive Driver operates the
after every start of train to ensure his locomotive to ensure movement of raw
presence in train and supervises work of materials, intermediates, finished
assistants in engine. Drives engine to loco- products within the plant. It includes
shed on completion of journey, fills up maintaining log book for performance
necessary forms, detailing required parameters and working condition of
repairs and hands over charge to Loco locomotive.
Shunter. May attend to running repairs of
mechanical and electrical defects in Qualification Pack Details:
engine, en-route. QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0006
QP NOS Name Locomotive Driver
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: NSQF Level 4
Code 8311
Title Locomotive Engine Drivers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8311
8311.0500 Title Locomotive Engine Drivers
Driver, Shunting (Loco)
Family 8312
Driver, Shunting (Loco); Loco Shunter
drives loco engine on rail tracks within Railway Braker, Signal and Switch
traffic yard for formation of and breaking Operators
up of passenger and goods trains under
direction of Yard Master. Takes charge of
Railway Brakers, Signallers and Shunters
engine after checking up various parts of
take charge of and safeguard railway
engine for operational efficiency. Obtains
freight trains during runs, control the
instructions from Yard Master for
movement of railway traffic by operating
breaking up and formation of trains.
signals, switch rolling stock and clean
Drives engine according to hand or yard
trains in railway yards, prepare trains for
signals from Signalman, Rly. Points
hauling in mines and control their
Worker, Railway and Pointsman, Railway,
movement.
and couples it to coaches, goods or empty
waggons for placing them at required
8312.0100
places and formation of trains. May work
Signalman, Railway
light train in case of emergency. May
attend to minor repairs of engine and
supervise work of crews in engine. May Signalman, Railway; Cabinman controls
drive diesel railway engine or electric flow of railway traffic over section of line
railway engine for shunting. within his jurisdiction by operating signals
recorded on the control graph and setting
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: of points from control tower or cabin
Code 8311 under instructions from Station Master.
Title Locomotive Engine Drivers Receives and transmits information about
train's movement by bell signal or
8311.0601 telephone after exchanging secret
numbers from train dispatcher or station
Locomotive Driver
VOLUME II B 504
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
master at Railway Station. Operates lever movement of waggons, carriages in yard
on which slot is transferred by train from one place to another. Informs
dispatcher. Controls movement of cabinman and pointsman concerned
shunting traffic within railway yards by about shunting plan; directs shunting
setting points and lowering signals when engine driver using hand flag lamp etc. for
signalled by shunting worker and Pilot movements of engine when points are set
Worker. Adjusts distant signals by to form trains. Supervises setting of lines
slackening signals wires at night and and completes coupling and uncoupling of
tightening them in morning by adjusting carriages and waggons within prescribed
screws and reports defects to senior time. May couple or uncouple waggons
officers. Signals trains at night when and carriages in absence of Pointsman.
visibility is poor using hand lamp, fixing
fog signals on railway line at fixed ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
distances to restrict speed or to stop train Code 8312
in emergency during day or night when Title Railway Braker, Signal and Switch
signals are off or to allow train to proceed Operators
further. Maintains contact with station
master through telephone and provides
information about traffic movement on 8312.0300
lines within his jurisdiction. Keeps contact
Points Man, Railway
with shunting worker through hand
signals for proper shunting operations.
Pointsman, Railway operates hand points
Cleans and oils levers to keep them in
for setting railway lines under instructions
perfect, order. May control opening and
of Points Worker or Station Master in non-
closing of gates at level crossings; may
interlock and non-signal lines for shunting
light signal lights at night at small railway
and arrival and departure of trains. Sets
stations.
points under instructions from Station
Master or Points Worker. Locks facing-
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
points in non-interlock yards or non-signal
Code 8312
lines for safeguard against derailment of
Title Railway Braker, Signal and Switch
train; signals trains using hand flag or light
Operators
to proceed in right direction. Ensures that
other connected lines are clear of
8312.0200
obstruction and brake of stationery train
Shunting Worker is away from fowling mark (a mark
indicating the minimum distance required
Shunting Worker; Pilot Worker; Points between two lines). May couple and
Worker (Railway) supervises work of uncouple waggons and coaches during
Pointsmen Railway operation of points shunting of trains.
and setting of railway lines in non- ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
interlock yard and guides movement of Code 8312
shunting engine in railway yard for Title Railway Braker, Signal and Switch
attaching to or detaching waggons and Operators
carriages from trains. Receives directions
from Station Master or Yard Master 8312.0400
regarding shunting of trains in yard or
Traffic Shunter, Railway
VOLUME II B 505
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Passenger Train if any equipment
Traffic-Shunter, Railway marshals goods requiring major repair.
and passenger trains in station yard
according to instructions received. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Receives instructions from Yard Foreman Code 8312
regarding formation of train, attaching or Title Railway Braker, Signal and Switch
detaching coaches and waggons to and Operators
from trains, shifting empty or through
coaches and waggons on sidings etc. Sets 8312.9900
lines according to plan and signals Loco
Pointsmen, Signalmen and
Shunter to proceed towards directions
Shunters, Railways, Other
indicated. Attaches coaches or waggons
by screwing hooks for tightness or
Pointsmen, Signalmen and Shunters
unscrews hooks for breaking or re-
Railways, Other include all other workers
arranging train or detaching engine, as
engaged in setting lines, signalling and
required.
shutting railway coaches, engines etc., not
elsewhere classified.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8312
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Railway Braker, Signal and Switch
Code 8312
Operators
Title Railway Braker, Signal and Switch
Operators
8312.0500
Braker, Passenger Train
Group 832
Braker, Passenger Train performs any
Car, Van and Motorcycle Drivers
combination of following duties on
passenger train: Inspects equipment, such
Car, Van and Motorcycle Drivers drive and
as couplings, air hose, journal boxes, and
tend motor cycles, motorized tricycles,
handbrakes, to ensure that they function
cars or vans to transport passengers,
properly. Assists passengers to board and
materials or goods.
leave train. Places passengers' baggage in
rack above seats on train. Answers
Occupations in this Group are classified
questions from passengers concerning
into the following Families:
train rules, station, and timetable
information. Turns knobs and pushes
8321 Motorcycle Drivers
switches on control panel to regulate air-
conditioning, heating, and lighting on train 8322 Car, Taxi and Van Drivers
for comfort of passengers. Sets warning
signals, such as flares, flags, lanterns, or
Family 8321
torpedoes, in front of and at rear of train
Motorcycle Drivers
during emergency stops to warn
oncoming trains. Makes minor repairs to
Motor-Cycle Drivers drive and tend motor
couplings, air hoses, and journal boxes,
cycles or motorised tricycles equipped to
using hand tools. Reports to Guard,
transport materials, goods or passengers.
VOLUME II B 506
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8321.0101 Delivery Associate; Two wheeler delivery
associate also is called as pizza
Driver Auto Rickshaw
boy/courier boy based on the goods he
delivers or a dispatch rider. Individuals at
Driver, Auto Rickshaw; Driver, Motor
this job need to safely and quickly deliver
Cycle Rickshaw drives auto rickshaw on
the goods to the intended customers
hire or as paid employee for transporting
using two wheelers as mode of transport
men and material, observing traffic rules
and signals. Cleans and washes vehicle
Qualification Pack Details:
and does running repairs. May maintain
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9710
book of journey.
QP NOS Name Two Wheeler
Delivery Associate
Qualification Pack Details:
NSQF Level 3
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9713
QP NOS Name Auto Rickshaw
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Driver
Code 8321
NSQF Level 4
Title Motorcycle Drivers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8321.9900
Code 8321
Motorcycle Drivers, Other
Title Motorcycle Drivers
8321.0200 Motorcycle Drivers, Other include drivers
who drive and tend motor cycles or
Despatch Rider
motorised tricycles equipped to transport
materials, goods and passengers not
Despatch Rider delivers urgent messages,
elsewhere classified.
telegrams and important communications
to addressees, riding auto or motor cycle,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
bicycle, etc. Receives urgent official
Code 8321
messages, telegraphic or otherwise, from
Title Motorcycle Drivers
authorities for quick delivery to
addressees. Keeps messages, telegrams
for records in bag for security and carries
Family 8322
them riding motor cycle, auto cycle, etc.
according to road condition for delivery.
Car, Taxi and Van Drivers
Obtains receipt of delivery on peon book.
May deliver dak in villages, riding on cycle Car, taxi and van drivers drive and tend
or horse. motor cars and vans to transport
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: passengers, mail or goods.
Code 8321
Title Motorcycle Drivers 8322.0100
Driver, Car
8321.0201 Driver, Car, Chauffeur drives motor car
Delivery Associate/Two Wheeler according to owner's requirement as paid
Delivery Associate employee. Observes road signals and
VOLUME II B 507
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
traffic rules. Attends to minor repairs. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
May wash and polish car and maintain log Code 8322
book for journey. May also do odd jobs Title Car, Taxi and Van Drivers
and run office or house-hold errands.
8322.0201
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Driver, Taxi
Code 8322
Title Car, Taxi and Van Drivers
Driver, Taxi Car drives motor car,
observing road signals and traffic rules, to
8322.0101
transport passengers from one place to
Chauffer, Driver Personal another on hire, based on length of travel
or as recorded in meter. Loads and
Chauffeur, Driver, Personal driver unloads baggage when necessary and
attached to an owner for driving their attends to minor repairs. Maintains
transport vehicle for commuting from one account and renders it to owner, if
destination to another within the city/out necessary.
station trips. Essentially at this level the
individual is expected to drive high end Qualification Pack Details:
vehicles and deal with senior members of QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9705
the society, tourists, and foreigners. QP NOS Name Taxi Driver
NSQF Level 4
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9711 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Name Chauffer Level 5 Code 8322
NSQF Level 5 Title Car, Taxi and Van Drivers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 8322.0301
Code 8322 Driver, Ambulance
Title Car, Taxi and Van Drivers
Driver, Ambulance drives ambulance to
8322.0102
transport sick, injured, or convalescent
Chauffer, Cab Driver persons. Assists in placing patient on
stretcher in ambulance; adjusts stretcher
Chauffer needs to drive for long and in secure position; takes sick or injured
awkward hours and unpredictable persons to hospital or to destination;
schedules. Individual must be polite and exercises care in driving ambulance to
dependable with the ability to remain avoid sudden motions, detrimental to
calm and composed under stressful patients; changes soiled linen on
conditions of traffic and demanding stretcher; administers first aid; maintains
customers. log-book of journeys performed. May
shackle violent patients.
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9712 Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Name Chauffer Level 4 QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9706
NSQF Level 4 QP NOS Name Ambulance Driver
NSQF Level 4
VOLUME II B 508
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
tramcars to transport goods, liquids,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: heavy materials, mail or passengers.
Code 8322
Title Car, Taxi and Van Drivers Occupations in this Group are classified
into the following Families:
8322.0501
Light Motor Vehicle Driver 8331 Bus and Tram Drivers
8332 Heavy Truck and Lorry Drivers
Light Motor Vehicle Driver or simply
Driver. needs to drive safely on the
Family 8331
assigned route with or without
Bus and Tram Drivers
Company of a senior driver and will be in
employment/or hired for a duration. This
Bus and tram drivers drive and tend buses
is also applicable to drivers commercially
or street tramcars to transport
working in the employment of a car
passengers, mail or goods.
owner or commercial drivers’ pool.
Individual needs to have a valid LMV
Learners driving Licence or LMV driving 8331.0100
licence. Tram Car Driver
Qualification Pack Details: Tram Car Driver drives electric tram cars
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9702 on scheduled routes in cities for
QP NOS Name Light Motor Vehicle transporting passengers to different
Driver Level 3 localities. Checks before start that tram is
NSQF Level 3 in perfect running condition and all
requisite material such as sidelights, tail
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: lamp, gong, first aid box, etc. are provided
Code 8322 in it; starts tram at scheduled time under
Title Car, Taxi and Van Drivers directions or signal from Depot Starter,
Tram; controls movement of tram in
8322.9900 response to traffic signals, and signals
given by Tram Conductor; studies running
Car, Taxi and Van Drivers, Other
time schedules and adjusts movement of
tram i.e. arrival and departure at specific
Car, Taxi and Van Drivers, Other include
places, accordingly, or acts under
drivers who drive and tend motor cars and
instructions from Traffic Regulator, Tram
vans to transport passengers, mail or
assists passengers in emergency; directs
goods not elsewhere classified.
Poleman, Tram to connect tram car pole
with overhead electric line in required
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
direction, keeps simple record of defects
Code 8322
noticed in tram or in track. May collect
Title Car, Taxi and Van Drivers
fares and issue tickets in small tram or in
Group 833
absence of Tram Conductor.
Heavy Truck and Bus Drivers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Heavy Truck and Bus Drivers drive and
Code 8331
tend heavy trucks, Lorries, buses or street
Title Bus and Tram Drivers
VOLUME II B 509
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Commercial Vehicle Driver needs to drive
8331.0200 safely on the assigned route. Individual
Trolley Driver needs to have a valid HMV driving Licence
and PSV badge. Individual is expected to
Drive a commercial vehicle including LCV,
Trolley Driver drives electrically or
pickup trucks, bus, maxi cab, school van,
mechanically operated trolleys on rails for
transport vehicles and ensuring safety of
carrying material within or outside mills,
passengers/goods as well as public on the
factories or industrial areas; operates
road. This role requires the individual to
electrically or mechanically driven trolley
possess relevant technical skills to handle
to haul raw material, finished products,
most of the routine break downs that
fuel and other material from one place to
could likely be encountered while driving
another within mills, factory, etc.; takes
long distances and through difficult
necessary precaution and restricts speed
terrains. The individual is also expected to
while driving within production centre as
achieve other key performance
safeguard against hazards.
parameters like fuel efficiency and on
time delivery etc.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8331
Qualification Pack Details:
Title Bus and Tram Drivers
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9703
QP NOS Name Commercial Vehicle
8331.0300
Driver-Level 4
Driver, Bus
NSQF Level 4
Driver, Bus drives bus to transport
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
passengers from one place to another
Code 8331
either over long distance or in urban area.
Title Bus and Tram Drivers
Checks fuel, oil, water, lights, brakes,
destination board, etc. Ensures that
8331.0302
vehicle is provided with tools and
Commercial Vehicle Driver-
documents required under Motor Vehicle
Act, such as registration book, road Assistant
permit, complaint book, first aid box etc.,
before commencing run. Drives bus Commercial Vehicle Driver-Assistant,
according to time schedule on prescribed Tempo Driver, Bus Driver or simply Driver.
route observing road signals and traffic Individuals at this job need to drive safely
rules. Starts and stops according to signals on the assigned route with or without
from Bus Conductor to pick up and drop company of a senior driver. Individual
passengers at recognised stops or on needs to have a valid HMV driving Licence
request. and PSV badge. Individual is expected to
drive a commercial vehicle including LCV,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: pick-up trucks, bus, maxi cab, school van,
Code 8331 heavy commercial vehicles (within city
Title Bus and Tram Drivers limits or in company of senior driver on
8331.0301 long routes) and ensuring safety of
passengers/goods as well as public on the
Commercial Vehicle Driver
road. The individual is also expected to
VOLUME II B 510
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
achieve other key performance installed as specified, and verifies that
parameters like fuel efficiency, on time vehicle has been serviced with oil, gas and
delivery etc. water; starts engine and listens for sounds
indicative of malfunctions of part or parts;
Qualification Pack Details: drives vehicles over test tracks, city
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9702 streets or highways, noting performance
QP NOS Name Commercial Vehicle of clutch, gears, brakes and other parts of
Driver-Level 3 vehicle; tests motor tuning, cylinder
NSQF Level 3 compression, fuel consumption, wheel
alignments, steering, horns, heater, wiper
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and power windows using testing devices;
reports finding to supervisor or customer
Code 8331
and recommends repair required. May
Title Bus and Tram Drivers
examine disassembled engine,
differential, or other parts during repair.
8331.0400
Driver, Fire Brigade Vehicles
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8331
Driver, Fire Brigade Vehicle drives heavy
Title Bus and Tram Drivers
motor vehicle equipped with firefighting
material for fighting fires or other rescue
8331.0501
operations. Keeps fire brigade vehicle
Test Driver
ready, duly equipped with material, to
proceed to requisite site instantly; drives
speedily, on receipt of instructions from Test Driver is responsible for conducting
Control Room to affected site following various types of outdoor tests on
shortest route and sounding alarm; assists automobile prototype in a simulated on
fire fighters in fixing ladders, connecting road test environment and actual
hoses etc. May ignore traffic signals to conditions to ensure proper measurement
save time. of the performance of the running proto
vehicle and documenting all observations
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: during the tests.
Code 8331
Qualification Pack Details:
Title Bus and Tram Drivers
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q8402
8331.0500 QP NOS Name Test Driver
NSQF Level 5
Driver Road Test
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Driver, Road Test; Test Driver; Vehicle
Code 8331
Tester (Automobile) drives completed or
Title Bus and Tram Drivers
experimental automotive vehicles under
test conditions to detect mechanical and
8331.0600
structural defects and to determine
repairs required. Examines automobile, Signalman, Tram
truck or bus before road testing to ensure
that all equipment, such as electrical Signalman, Tram guides operation of tram
wiring, hydraulic lines and fan belt are cars on single track by signalling with flag
VOLUME II B 511
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
or light. Gets acquainted with traffic rules, another, observing road signals and traffic
busy hours of work and any other special rules. Checks fuel, oil, water, lights, brakes
instructions issued by traffic authorities, etc., and ensures that vehicle is provided
ensures that traffic, control lights are in with tools, tarpaulin and all documents
order, operates switches at control points required under Motor Vehicles Act such as
for directing trams to their various registration book, fitness certificate, route
destinations. May signal tram to stop or to permit, etc., before commencing run.
proceed by waving red or green flags. May Attends to running repairs and keeps
be designated as POINTSMAN TRAM, if truck in working order. May make
engaged only in setting control points for deliveries, collect payments and obtain
directing trains to respective directions. and issue receipts.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8331 Code 8332
Title Bus and Tram Drivers Title Heavy Truck and Lorry Drivers
8331.9900 8332.0200
Bus and Tram Drivers, Other Tram Car Driver (Mines)
Bus and Tram Drivers, Other include Tram Driver, Mines drives electric cars for
drivers who drive and tend buses or street transporting mining material on surface or
tramcars to transport passengers, mail or underground in small waggons, tubs etc.
goods not elsewhere classified. Inspects engine, electric connections,
gasoline etc. provided in tram-car;
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: attaches empty small waggons or tubs to
Code 8331 tram car and positions them for loading
Title Bus and Tram Drivers mining material; shunts and detaches
loaded waggons on surface or
underground for transportation of
material to other places through trolley or
other vehicles; attaches empty waggons
for repeating process; inspects engine or
Family 8332
power line at end of shift. May manipulate
levers to open or tilt cars to dump
Heavy Truck and Lorry Drivers
material; may fuel and lubricate the
engine.
Heavy-truck and lorry drivers drive and
tend heavy motor vehicles to transport
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
goods, liquids and heavy materials over
Code 8332
short or long distances.
Title Heavy Truck and Lorry Drivers
8332.0100
8332.9900
Driver Truck
Heavy Truck and Lorry Drivers,
Other
Driver, Truck drives motor truck for
Heavy Truck and Lorry Drivers, Other
transporting goods from one place to
include drivers who drive and tend heavy
VOLUME II B 512
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
motor vehicles to transport goods, liquids Tractor Operator, Farm; Tractor Driver,
and heavy materials over short or long Farm operates and services farm tractor
distances not elsewhere classified. having different attachments for
ploughing, harrowing, harvesting and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: other agricultural operations. Checks
Code 8332 different parts of tractor to ensure that it
Title Heavy Truck and Lorry Drivers is in proper working order. Collects,
Group 834 attaches and adjusts special equipment,
required for different operations of
tractor. Feeds tractor with fuel and
Mobile Plant Operators
demarcates land for ploughing. Starts
tractor and drives it through fields at
Mobile Plant Operators drive, tend,
regulated speed depending on nature of
operate and monitor special-purpose
soil and work. Controls operation of
motorised, machinery or equipment used
different attachments including turning of
for clearing or preparing land; digging,
wheels by operating levers and pedals as
moving, and spreading earth, rock and
required. Tows trailers laden with crops
similar materials; and lifting or moving
and other materials when required.
heavy objects.
Cleans and oils machine. Maintains tractor
and other implements in good working
Occupations in this Group are classified
order and keeps record of fuel
into the following Families:
consumption. May supervise work of
Helpers. May detect mechanical defects
8341 Mobile Farm and Forestry Plant
and undertake minor repairs.
Operators
8342 Earth Moving and Related Plant Qualification Pack Details:
Operators QP NOS Reference AGR/Q0401
8343 Crane, Hoist and Related Plant QP NOS Name Tractor Operator
Operators NSQF Level 4
8344 Lifting Truck Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8341
Family 8341
Title Mobile Farm and Forestry Plant
Mobile Farm and Forestry Plant
Operators
Operators
8341.0200
Mobile Farm and Forestry Plant Operators
Operator, Farm Machines
drive, tend, operate and monitor one or
more types of special-purpose motorised,
Operator, Farm Machines operates and
mobile machinery or equipment used in
maintains various kinds of power, animal
agricultural, horticultural and forestry
or hand driven farm machines used in
operations.
agricultural, dairy, poultry and other
farms. Fits and adjusts special equipment
8341.0101
intended to be used in different power,
Tractor Operator, Farm hand or animal driven farm machine.
Outlines area for operation. Harnesses
VOLUME II B 513
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
animals to machine or implement and ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
adjusts it if necessary. Drives power or Code 8341
animal driven machine through fields at Title Mobile Farm and Forestry Plant
regulated speed. Controls movements and Operators
operations of machine and attachments
by operating levers or paddles as 8341.0300
necessary. Checks performance, ensures
Tractor Driver, Construction
efficient running, and refuels and
lubricates machine when needed. Keeps
Tractor Driver, Construction operates
machines and other implements cleaned,
petrol or diesel powered tractor to haul
lubricated and in good working order.
vehicles or implements such as trailors,
Maintains record of food and fuel
waggon, graders, etc. for pushing, pulling
consumption. May supervise work of
or moving goods and material or dumping
helpers. May do minor repairs to
earth. Checks engine oil, radiator water,
machines and attend to minor ailments of
diesel or petrol supply and other
animals used. May be designated
important greasing points of vehicles.
according to machine handled.
Checks that brakes and pedals of vehicle
are in good condition. Fastens
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
attachments, such as graders, trailors,
Code 8341
ploughs, and rollers to tractor with hitch
Title Mobile Farm and Forestry Plant
pins; releases brakes, shifts gears, and
Operators
depresses, accelerator or moves throttle
to control forward and backward
8341.0201
movement of machine; steers tractor by
Harvesting Machine Operator turning steering wheel and depressing
brake pedals. May couple and uncouple
Harvesting Machine Operator, also known loads to and from tractor. May lubricate
as Combine Harvester Operator, is and repair tractor and attachments. May
responsible for safe operation and day-to- be designated according to type of power
day maintenance of harvesting machine. utilised as DIESEL TRACTOR OPERATOR OR
The individual at work sets up the GASOLINE-TRACTOR OPERATOR.
harvesting machine for day’s work by
conducting pre-start procedures, operate ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
the machine to harvest the crop, perform Code 8341
machine shut down procedure, does its Title Mobile Farm and Forestry Plant
day-to-day maintenance and takes up Operators
basic repair of the harvesting machine to
keep it operational during critical harvest 8341.9900
time.
Farm Machinery Operators, Other
Qualification Pack Details:
Farm Machinery Operators, Other include
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q1002
all other workers engaged in operating
QP NOS Name Harvesting Machine
farm machinery for agricultural purposes,
Operator
not elsewhere classified.
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 514
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Code 8341 Scrapper Operator operates scrapper
Title Mobile Farm and Forestry Plant (power-driven machine fitted with
Operators mechanical scrapping device) to scrape
and level earth. Checks engine for fuel and
oil supply, and water in radiator; starts
Family 8342 engine and checks for proper functioning
of various levers and controls; attaches
Earth Moving and Related Plant double or four-wheeled scrapper
attachment to tractor; drives tractor to
Operators
place of work; operates levers to release
scrapping device (adjustable cutting blade
Earth Moving and Related Plant Operators
and scoop); runs tractor over desired area
operate machines to excavate, grade,
to dig up earth, level and load it
level, smooth and compact earth or
automatically into container; drives
similar materials.
tractor to dumping location to unload
earth from container. Repeats process
8342.0101
until area scrapped to desired depth and
Bulldozer Operator levelled; lubricates, fuels and makes minor
repairs to machine. May attend to minor
Bulldozer Operator operates bulldozer repairs. May drive tractor for handling
(caterpillar tractor with concave steel heavy goods and equipment. May operate
scrapper blade mounted in front of special types of scrapping machines.
chassis) to move, distribute and level
earth. Starts motor and adjusts hand lever ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to regulate height of scrapper blade from Code 8342
ground; engages clutch and releases brake Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
to drive machine to push earth; operates Operators
levers to level and distribute it; lubricates,
fuels and makes minor repairs to machine. 8342.0301
May push and pull other equipment with
Scrapper Loader Operator/Loader
bulldozer.
Operator
Qualification Pack Details:
Scrapper Loader Operator operates
QP NOS Reference MIN/Q 0401
mechanical scrapper loader fitted to
QP NOS Name Bulldozer Operator
tractor to cut, remove and convey earth
NSQF Level 4
or other material and load it in dumper.
Adjusts toe (cutting device) fitted to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
scrapper to cut into earth at desired angle
Code 8342
and position; manipulates lever on control
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
panel of tractor to start machine to cut,
Operators
remove, convey material and load into
dumper placed nearby. May make repairs
8342.0200
to equipment.
Scrapper Operator
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference MIN/Q 0407
VOLUME II B 515
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
QP NOS Name Loader Operator fuel and oil level in engine and water in
NSQF Level 4 radiator; starts and runs engine to ensure
that various levers and controls are in
good working order; drives vehicle to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: work site; operates hand and foot levers
Code 8342 to lower and move shovel, fill it with
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant material and swing it over conveyance or
Operators dumping location; pulls rope to allow
8342.0400 bottom of shovel to open and release
material; moves machine forward or
Grader Operator
backward to facilitate work; makes minor
repairs to machine. May maintain power
Grader Operator; Road Grader operates
unit. May be designated as GRAB-BUCKET
power-driven machine fitted with
OPERATOR, if operates power-driven
adjustable steel blades to level ground by
machine, equipped with hinge-type
pushing earth to sides. Checks fuel supply,
bucket attachment, for excavating and
radiator water and oil level in engine;
moving earth, rock or similar materials.
fixes, at required angle, appropriate steel
blade to arm of machine, depending on
Qualification Pack Details:
type of grading; rides in control cab, starts
QP NOS Reference MIN/Q 0404
motor, moves levers and adjusts hand-
QP NOS Name Excavator Operator
wheels, and regulates height of scrapper
NSQF Level 4
blade over area of work; drives machine
over centre of roadway, scrapping earth
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and pushing ridges of earth to edge for
removal; continues the process Code 8342
repeatedly to level ground to required Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
condition; tilts or changes position of Operators
blades for ground to be prepared; cleans,
oils and greases machine parts. May 8342.0600
attend to minor repairs. May operate Bucket Wheel Excavator Operator
special types of grading machines.
Bucket Wheel Excavator Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: operates power-driven machine equipped
Code 8342 with loading and cutting boom bearing
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant rotating bucket wheel with teeth for
Operators excavating and moving earth, rock or
similar materials and to discharge
8342.0501 contents on to conveyor system. Moves
Power Shovel Operator/Excavator machine under its own power to location
of work. Moves hand and foot levers to
Operator
place jib (boom) with bucket directly
above excavating point; manipulates
Power Shovel Operator; Excavating Shovel
levers and switches on operating panel of
Operator operates power-driven shovel to
machine to start or stop excavator;
excavate, move and load earth, rock,
operates lever to raise, dip or swing boom
sand, gravel and other material for earth
in required direction and position;
removing and construction work. Checks
VOLUME II B 516
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
observes meters and gauges to regulate components, moves machine under its
cutting of earth, to drop open bucket into own power to location of work; moves
material, to close and lift filled bucket, to hand and foot levers to place jib (boom)
swing jib and place bucket, and to release with bucket above excavation point, lower
material on conveyor belt for transporting bucket on desired spot, drag it towards
to processing point. Makes minor repairs machine and fill it with material, place
to machine. bucket over unloading point, tilt bucket,
and release material. Makes necessary
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: repairs to machine, and follows proper
Code 8342 operating and safety conditions.
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
Operators ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8342
8342.0700 Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
Trench Digging Machine Operator Operators
8342.0900
Trench Digging Machine Operator
operates power-driven machine mounted Dredger Operator
on wheels or chains and equipped with
devices for digging trenches, such as those Dredger Operator operates power-driven
for sewer, water, drainage, oil and gas equipment mounted on dredge for
pipelines. Starts engine and pulls levers to excavating rock or removing silt from
control movement of caterpillar treads to navigation channel to enable seagoing
move machine into position; engages vessels to enter and leave harbour.
excavating mechanism and moves hand Directs and supervises crew in placing
levers to start or stop digging equipment, dredge in position for excavating; starts
and to raise or lower it for correct depth and stops engines for operating
of trench; makes minor repairs to excavating equipment; watches tide
machine. May set up line along which gauge and adjusts excavating mechanism
machine is guided. to work uniformly; operates ladder
excavating equipment, by manipulating
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: levers and hand-wheels to raise or lower
Code 8342 jib (boom) equipped with endless chain of
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant steel buckets, and observing contents of
Operators buckets to ascertain type of material
being excavated; operates hydraulic
8342.0800 excavating equipment by pushing or
pulling levers to raise or lower frame on
Dragline Operator
which suction pipe and cutter head are
mounted, and by starting and stopping
Dragline Operator operates power-driven
rotation of cutter head; observes vacuum
machine equipped with dragline bucket
and pressure gauges to determine
for excavating and moving earth, rock,
whether sand or water is being raised;
gravel or similar materials. Checks fuel
operates dipper or hinged bucket
and oil level in engine and water in
excavating equipment by manipulating
radiator; starts and runs engine to test
hand and foot levers to raise or lower
and ensure good performance of all
VOLUME II B 517
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
dipper or buckets into water, and by levers to move machine into position for
adjusting position of jib for loading or driving piles; hoists pile and lowers it into
unloading dipper or bucket. May change position for driving; ensures that all drag
position of dredge by drawing in or letting lines and cables are in good condition, and
out anchor cables. May make repairs to that power or drop-hammer tied to lift
equipment. May be designated according pile tube securely, manipulates controls to
to type of excavating equipment on operate hammer; makes adjustment on
dredge. hoisting engine, repairs and maintaining
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: machine. May operate air-compressor
Code 8342 when using pneumatic power hammer.
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant May direct or assist other workers in
Operators setting up pile-driver leads and
machinery. May be designated according
8342.1000 to equipment used, as COMPRESSED-AIR
PILE DRIVER; DIESEL-PILE-
Boom Driver
DRIVER/OPERATOR; ELECTRIC-PILE-
DRIVER/OPERATOR; POWER HAMMER-
Boom Driver signals and assists Dredger
PILE DRIVER OPERATOR; STEAM-PILE-
Operator for correct lowering and raising
DRIVER OPERATOR, or according to kind
of dredger dipper arm to remove silt or
of piles driven as SHEET-PILE-DRIVER
rocks from navigation channel and port
OPERATOR; WOOD-PILE-DRIVER
mouth. Operates hand and foot levers to
OPERATOR.
raise or lower dipper or buckets into and
out of water, and to adjust position of jib
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
for loading or unloading dipper or bucket;
Code 8342
ensures firm pushing of dipper arm in sea-
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
bed by observing gauges; operates
Operators
controls to open bucket for dumping
dredged material at proper place,
8342.1201
signalling Dredger Operator to move
dredge. Dumper Operator/Dumper/Tipper
Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8342 Dumper Operator; Dump Truck Driver
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant operates power-driven motor truck,
Operators dumping unit vehicle, or caterpillar vehicle
with dumper at its rear for transporting
8342.1100 loose material, such as sand, gravel,
Pile Driver crushed rock, or coal. Drives loaded truck
to dumping site and manipulates levers
inside cab which control dumping
Pile Driver; Jack Hammer Operator
mechanism, or turns hand crank on side of
operates power-driven or manually
truck to raise truck body to dump load.
operated machine equipped with
Moves truck forward and backward to
pneumatic, steam or drop-hammer for
loosen and dump material adhering to
driving wooden, concrete or steel piles
side and floor of body. May operate
into dry ground, or water-bed for
mechanical loading equipment. May clean
construction work. Moves hand and foot
VOLUME II B 518
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
and lubricate vehicle and conduct running load and move loose materials, such as
repairs. sand, fertilizer, etc., in warehouse or other
establishment. Starts truck and moves
Qualification Pack Details: lever to lower scoop; drives truck forward
QP NOS Reference MIN/Q 0403 to push scoop into heap of material to be
QP NOS Name Dumper/Tipper moved; fills scoop, raises it, and drives
Operator truck forward until scoop is over storage
NSQF Level 4 bin or dumping location; moves lever to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: tilt scoop forward and empty its contents;
repeats operation to move required
Code 8342
quantity of material. May operate truck
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
with drop-bottom scoop to load, remove
Operators
and discharge loose material by opening
and closing bottom. May clean and
8342.1202
lubricate vehicle. May conduct running
Dumper Operator
repairs to vehicle.
Dumper Operator drives a heavy
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
specialized truck used to haul large
Code 8342
volumes of over burden, rock or ore over
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
short distances. The Dumper Operator
Operators
then uses the body hoist control lever to
tip the rear part of the truck in order to
8342.1400
discharge its load to rear, bottom or one
Trippler Machine Operator
side of the truck. Dumper Operators are
responsible to check that their safety
systems are working properly and for Tippler Machine Operator operates
performing basic maintenance on the power-driven tippling machine to tip open
Dumper. waggon for unloading coal or other
materials from it. Observes loaded
Qualification Pack Details: waggon pushed into position to platform
of tippling machine; ensures fastening of
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0003
waggon securely to platform with chain or
QP NOS Name Dumper Operator
other contrivance to avoid derailment;
NSQF Level 3
manipulates levers and switches on
tippler machine to tip waggon to empty
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
contents or load conveyor or other tank
Code 8342
and bring back waggon to position.
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
Repeats process with other loaded
Operators
waggons.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8342
8342.1300
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
Scoop Truck Operator
Operators
Scoop Truck Operator operates truck
8342.1500
equipped with tilting scoop attachment to
VOLUME II B 519
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Conveyor Operator lever to swing boom and spread material.
Makes minor repairs to machine.
Conveyor Operator operates power-
driven endless chain or conveyor belt at ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
constant speed to transport material Code 8342
continuously to required place. Starts and Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
stops conveyor by manipulating motor Operators
switches and clutch levers; adjusts 8342.1700
movement of conveyor at required speed; Road Roller Driver
regulates flow of material according to
instructions or knowledge of process by
Road Roller Driver drives steam or diesel
switching conveyors at interjection points,
road roller to consolidate and level road,
opening and closing chute slide, and
pavement or other surface to desired
adjusting conveyor scales and cut-offs to
compact and smoothness. Checks fuel, oil
deposit desired amounts of materials at
and water supply in engine; starts engine
process points; maintains constant
and drives roller backward and forward
surveillance of conveyor operations to
over surface wheel; repeats operation
prevent break-downs; ensures pulleys,
over various layers of materials used in
rollers and other mechanism does not get
making roads or similar works of
jammed or heated. Oils and tightens
construction, until desired compactness or
conveyor parts and joints; makes repairs
smoothness has been obtained. Oils and
to conveyor belt and driving mechanism.
greases machine and makes minor
May transfer material from one conveyor
repairs.
to another by manipulating levers. May be
designated as BUCKET-CONVEYOR
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
OPERATOR, if tends bucket-type
Code 8342
conveyors used to convey crushed rock,
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
lime or other loose materials.
Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8342.1800
Code 8342
Bitumen Mixing Machine Operator
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
Operators
Bitumen Mixing Machine Operator; Coal-
Tar Mixing Machine Operator operates
8342.1600
mobile power-driven bitumen or coal tar
Spreader Operator
mixing machine to mix bitumen or coal tar
with gravel for paving roadway, airstrip
Spreader Operator operates power-driven
under construction or repair, or for
machines equipped with receiver and
coating roofs to make them water-proof.
spreader boom to receive earth or other
Starts and regulates fires under boiler or
material from main conveyor and spread
power unit, asphalt heating kettles, and
it at specified site. Starts and stops
aggregate drying drum; starts and stops
machine; manipulates levers to raise, dip
various units by manipulating hand levers.
and swing spreader boom in desired
Ensures aggregate and bitumen are at
position; moves machine under its own
proper temperature, by observing heat
power to specified location and operates
recording device; manipulates levers on
VOLUME II B 520
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
pumps which supply asphalt to kettles or Qualification Pack Details:
mixing box; obtains test reports or makes QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0004
own tests to ensure that mixer conforms QP NOS Name Excavator Operator
to specifications. Oils and greases NSQF Level 3
machine. May make minor repairs to the
machine. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8342
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
Code 8342 Operators
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
Operators 8342.2101
Mobile Equipment Operator
8342.1900
Sand Blast Operator, Construction
Mobile Equipment Operator inspects
mobile equipment like Fork Lift truck,
Sand Blast Operator, Construction directs Skid-loader/Bob Cat, Pay loader and JCB,
blast of sand compressed air from nozzle as used in steel plant for proper working
against stone, brick structure, or other condition, loading and driving the vehicle
hard surface to clean dirt, grease, etc. for carrying materials from one place to
prior to laying of cement concrete, another inside the plant. This job also
plastering, etc. Examines surface for sand involves carrying out basic maintenance of
blasting; fills sand container with sifted the equipment.
sand; connects compressed-air hose to
sand container and nozzle and adjusts Qualification Pack Details:
pressure valve; wears heavy gloves to
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0015
protect hands, and helmet or hood as
QP NOS Name Mobile Equipment
protection against breathing sand-laden
Operator
aid and to protect eyes; holds nozzle at
NSQF Level 3
proper distance from object and releases
trigger finger of nozzle to blow sand
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
against surface of object; cleans and
Code 8342
prepares surface for further processing.
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8342
8342.2201
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
Operators
Stoking Car Operator Ferro Alloys
8342.2001
Stoking Car Operator Ferro Alloys inspects
Excavator Operator
the stoking car is in proper condition
ensuring run/drives on the shop floor for
Excavator Operator drives and controls an
stoking the charge and to release the
excavator which is a self-propelled
gases between the electrode without
machine used to dig and dump over the
touching the electrodes. It involves
base level of the machine.
covering the arc properly and distribute
VOLUME II B 521
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
the charge uniformly. It also involves
carrying out basic maintenance of the Driver, Steam Crane operates steam-
stoking car. driven crane for lifting and moving heavy
objects. Operates crane mounted on rail
Qualification Pack Details: car by engaging clutch, manipulating
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q1101 throttle and pressing brakes to move
QP NOS Name Stoking Car crane on track, and to stop it. Ensures
Operator Ferro proper firing of boiler and maintains
Alloys required steam, pressure. Manipulates
NSQF Level 3 clutches, throttles, brakes and control
valves to rotate crane on its car to raise
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and lower crane boom, or to raise or
lower load line and anything attached to
Code 8342
it. Follows signals of workers to hoist,
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
slow, lower or unload heavy objects and
Operators
materials in desired position. Ensures that
lifting tackle and other parts of equipment
8342.9900
are in perfect condition and maximum
Earth Moving and Related Plant
lifting capacity of load not exceeded.
Operators, Other
Cleans boilers periodically and attends to
minor repairs or equipment. May operate
Earth Moving and Related Plant steam-driven winches to lift heavy
Operators, Other include workers who objects.
operate and monitor machines to
excavate, grade, level and compact earth ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
or similar materials and lay surfaces of
Code 8343
asphalt and concrete not elsewhere
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
classified.
Operators
8343.0200
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Crane Operator, Diesel Electric
Code 8342
Title Earth Moving and Related Plant
Crane Operator, Diesel/Electric operates
Operators
diesel-electric powered (Tourna) crane
mounted on pneumatic wheels to lift,
Family 8343
carry and lower heavy loads from one
Crane, Hoist and Related Plant place to another. Starts engine and drives
Operators vehicle to work site. Manipulates controls
to position crane, crane job (boom) and
lifting tackle so that load can be attached.
Crane, Hoist and Related Plant Operators
Raises, moves and places load in required
operate and monitor stationary and
position following signals from slinger or
mobile cranes and other hoisting
helpers. Ensures proper operating and
equipment.
safety conditions as guided by signals
from other workers. Lubricates moving
8343.0100
parts, tightens nuts and bolts and
Driver, Steam Crane
VOLUME II B 522
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
performs other servicing tasks to keep lift, carry and lower heavy objects from
equipment in good working order. May one place to another. Checks jib and
attend to minor running repairs. cables for security and serviceability;
starts crane motor; operates levers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: controlling valves to raise or lower hook
Code 8343 for loading or unloading of object. Ensures
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant that load or object is hooked securely to
Operators lifting tackle by workers or slinger.
Manipulates hand levers to raise and
move load to required level and unload
8343.0300
object in desired position. Operates crane
Crane Operator, Pneumatic
in accordance with signals from other
workers, observing safety conditions while
Crane Operator, Pneumatic; E.M.E.
loading and unloading.
Operator, Cranes operates air lock system
crane (Terra-Cobra, Lima) run by diesel
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
power and mounted on pneumatic
Code 8343
wheels, to lift, carry and lower heavy
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
objects from one place to another. Checks
Operators
oil, water, etc.; starts engine and drives
crane to work site, using hand gears and
8343.0500
levers. Starts crane motor and
Mobile Crane Operator
manipulates controls to open and close
valves to maintain correct supply of air to
equipment by observing pressure, Mobile Crane Operator; Tractor Crane
temperature and other gauges and to Operator; Crawler Crane Operator; Truck
position crane, crane jib (boom) and lifting Crane Operator operates diesel or petrol-
tackle so that load can be attached; raises, driven mobile crane, mounted on
moves, lowers and places heavy load in caterpillar tracks or truck chassis, to lift,
required position following signals from carry and lower heavy objects in any
helpers, ensuring proper operating and direction. Starts engine and drives crane
safety conditions. Cleans and oils to work site; starts crane motor and
equipment and performs other servicing manipulates controls to position crane,
tasks to keep equipment in running order. crane jib (boom) and lifting tackle to
May make minor repairs. attach or detach load; raises, moves and
places load in required position. May
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: direct helper to drive crane into position.
May operate a crane fitted with
Code 8343
mechanical grab attached to lifting tackle.
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8343.0400 Code 8343
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
Crane Operator, Hydraulic
Operators
Crane Operator, Hydraulic operates
8343.0501
(Zambo) crane mounted on pneumatic
EOT Crane Operator
wheels and driven by hydraulic power to
VOLUME II B 523
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
metal bridge to lift, move and lower heavy
EOT Crane Operator operates overhead objects from one place to another.
cranes for safe transfer of raw material, Switches on power supply; takes position
intermediaries and finished products in overhead cabin and signals ground crew
within the plant on receiving the signal. to move away from crane; manipulates
Qualification Pack Details: levers and controls to check and assure
QP NOS Reference ISC/Q0007 bridge hoist, lifting tackle etc., are free
QP NOS Name EOT Crane Operator from mechanical jamming and in working
NSQF Level 3 order; operates controls to move bridge
along rails and lifting equipment along
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: bridge tackle for loads to be attached;
follows signals from ground crew to raise,
Code 8343
move and lower load in desired position
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
observing proper operating and safety
Operators
conditions. Shuts down power supply on
completion of work. May undertake minor
8343.0600
repairs to crane.
Crane Operator, Gantry
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Crane Operator Gantry; Gantry Crane
Code 8343
Operator operates electrically-driven high
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
capacity crane mounted on gantry steel
Operators
tower structure, supported by wheels to
run on track laid along ground, to lift,
8343.0800
move and lower heavy objects from
Derrick Crane Operator
ground to heights and vice versa. Switches
on power supply; moves electrical control
levers and brake pedals to run towers Derrick Crane Driver operates electrically-
along their tracks, to run hoisting trolley driven derrick crane consisting of movable
(rack) across bridge, and to raise or lower jib (boom) which can be raised or lowered
load line and anything attached to it or turned full circle or moved forward and
following signals from slinger on ground, backwards to lift, move and lower heavy
observing safety conditions. May be objects from one place to another. Checks
designated according to type of work jib and cables for security and
performed or type of materials moved. serviceability; switches on power supply;
takes position in overhead cabin and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: starts crane motor; operates controls to
swing, raise or lower jib and to place
Code 8343
lifting tackle for load to be attached.
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
Manipulates controls to lift load attached
Operators
to movable arm (jib) by ground crew;
raises, moves and lowers load to desired
8343.0700
position following signals from workers on
Overhead Crane Operator
ground and observing proper operating
and safety conditions. Instructs and
Overhead Crane Operator; Bridge Crane
supervises cleaning, greasing and oiling of
Operator operates electrically-driven
crane running on overhead rails laid on
VOLUME II B 524
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
machinery parts. May attend to minor for load to be attached; raises, moves and
repairs. lowers load to desired position; operates
crane observing signals from workers on
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ground to obtain position of jib and lifting
Code 8343 hook. Instructs and supervises helpers in
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant cleaning, greasing and oiling machinery.
Operators
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8343.0900 Code 8343
Derrick Crane Operator, Magnetic Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
Operators
8343.1100
Derrick Crane Operator, Magnetic
operates electric-powered derrick crane Winchman
to magnetically lift and move ingots or
heavy iron balls and to break iron balls by Winchman; Winch Operator operates
dropping. Switches on power supply and power-driven winch (hauling or lifting
starts crane motor; manipulates levers to device, consisting essentially of a cable, a
position derrick jib, lower magnetised hand or power-driven drum) to lift and
slings to touch cracker iron balls, lift and lower load, bend pipes, etc. or to hoist
move jib with sling, lower load and cut off and lower dredging pipes, grabs etc., on
magnet to drop cracker at desired dredges. Ensures that cable, winch drum
position; operates crane in accordance and winch brake are in good working
with signals from ground crew. Cleans, order. Threads cable through pulley
greases and oils moving parts of crane. wheels and introduces additional pulley
May undertake minor repairs to wheels in cable linkage, if necessary;
machinery. connects end of cable to object to be
moved, or directs helpers to do so; starts
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: engine of winch, or turns winch handle, to
Code 8343 raise or pull object into position, adjusting
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant speed of pulling and applying brake as
Operators necessary. May control winch in
accordance with signals by other workers.
8343.1000 May attend to minor repairs and tend
cable, ropes, pulley, and lifting tackle. May
Crane Driver, Hammer Head
operate winches to draw heavy cargoes or
boats to shore. May also work on
Crane Driver, Hammer-Head operates
manually operated winches. May be
power-driven hammer-head crane
designated according to power used, such
consisting of fixed jib, with lifting
as WINCH DRIVER, PNEUMATIC; WINCH
equipment attached to trolley that can be
DRIVER, ELECTRICAL.
moved on rails along jib, forward or
backward, as necessary; jib itself being
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
capable of rotating full circle in horizontal
Code 8343
plane. Switches on power supply; checks
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
jib and cables for security and
Operators
serviceability; operates controls to swing,
raise or lower jib and to place lifting tackle
VOLUME II B 525
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
8343.1200 Code 8343
Hoist Operator Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
Operators
8343.1400
Hoist Operator; Hoist Operator,
Construction operates hoisting equipment Winding Engineman
to raise or lower power-controlled cage,
platform or truck carrying men and Winding Engineman; Winding Engine
materials at construction site. Ensures Driver; Hoist Operator, Mine operates
that cables, drums, and other hoisting steam, diesel or electric-d riven
equipment are in perfect condition; loads equipment to raise or lower cage or skip
or oversees loading of cage, platform or with men or materials through vertical or
other lifting tackle connected to hoist, and inclined mine shaft according to signal
starts motor; moves levers to raise or from surface or underground workers.
lower load to required point; moves lifting Starts engine and undertakes trial run of
tackle to fresh position, when unloading equipment to check and ensure that
completed. May raise or lower hoist in component parts of engine, cable, etc. are
response to bell or other signals by in good working order; manipulates
workers. May work on surface or controls to raise or lower cage skip in
underground. May attend to minor response to bell or other signals given by
repairs. May operate electric, steam or workers at top of mine shaft or below
other types of hoist. surface; stops hoist when dial indicator
shows that cage or skip has reached
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: required level. May attend to minor
Code 8343 repairs.
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
Operators ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8343
8343.1300 Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
Bridge Opening Operator Operators
Bridge Opening Operator operates steam, 8343.1500
hydraulic or electric devices to control and Haulage Engine Driver
closing of bridge for passage of water or
road traffic. Watches passage of traffic Haulage Engine Driver; Haulage Attendant
and opens and closes bridge manually or operates steam, diesel, electric or
by manipulating gears, levers, etc. as compressed air drive hauling device to lift
desired, ensuring safety of passing traffic or lower full or empty tubs in collieries or
by blowing horns or giving other signals, if mines. Ensures that cable, winch brake
necessary; operates light or semaphore etc. are in good working order; starts
signals to indicate whether bridge is open engine in response to signals to raise or
or closed. Keeps bridge equipment in lower cars or tubs along haulage track, as
good working order. May check gate pass required, regulating speed; stops hauling
for men and material. May make minor device according to signals, readings, in
repairs to machinery. indicator and drum marks. May attend to
minor repairs.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 526
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: causing cages/buckets to move between
Code 8343 boarding and offloading area; maintains
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant desired distance between each cage in
Operators ropeway by manipulating mechanical
retarder to prevent collision with one
another; observes movement of rope and
8343.1600
operates machine to regulate it. Switches
Crane and Hoist Operators, Other
off ropeway and applies brakes on
receiving signal from load receiving end.
Crane and Hoist Operators, Other; include
May maintain record of rounds of
Crane and Hoist Operator, not elsewhere
passengers transported. May attend to
classified such as: Monocrane Operator, if
running repairs, lubrication etc. of plant
operates electrically powered monocrane
and equipment.
fitted with fixed jib, and which turns to full
circle to lift, raise and lower heavy loads
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
from one place to another. Crane
Code 8343
Operator, Portable, if operates tractor
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
equipped with hoist to move designated
Operators
loads from point to point in shipyard. Skip-
hoist Operator, if tends hoist to lift
8343.1800
building materials to upper levels of
Liftman
structures undergoing construction.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Liftman; Lift Operator operates electric lift
to raise or lower cage, carrying passengers
Code 8343
and goods from one floor to another in
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
residential, office, hotel, hospital,
Operators
commercial or industrial building
according to bell or buzzer signals. Opens
8343.1700
outer gate of lift entrance and inner gate
Aerial Ropeway Operator
of lift cage by turning handle or by electric
switches to permit men and goods inside
Aerial Ropeway Operator; Attendant
carrier cage, closes both gates manually or
Aerial Ropeway operates endless ropeway
by electrical switches; presses electric
to transport passengers from one place to
push button of desired floor number as
another such as from pithed or refinery
indicated in panel to move cage carrying
across river, hill tops etc. Checks that
men or material upward or downward as
buckets and cages are securely clamped
required. Stops lift at required floor by
to rope, pulley runs freely and rope is in
operating switches, opens double gates of
working order; pulls levers to position
lift for passengers and goods to move out
cages/buckets on ground or platform for
and move in. Observes bell or buzzer
boarding or pushes button to off load, or
sound to operate lift to called floor to take
observes signal panel and listens for
men and material. Ensures that lift is not
malfunction of automatic offloading
loaded over authorised capacity. Reports
equipment; Communicates telephonically
to superior malfunctioning of lift when
or signals by buzzer receiving point,
detected. May operate automatic lifts
readiness of load to be conveyed; pushes
which by push button action closes gates,
buttons to start reel and winding cable
VOLUME II B 527
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
travels and stops at required floor, trucks. May operate manually operated
automatically. vehicle. May attend to minor running
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: repairs, and clean and lubricate parts of
Code 8343 vehicle.
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
Operators ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8344
8343.9900 Title Lifting Truck Operators
Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
8344.0201
Operators, Other
Fork Lift Truck Operator
Crane, Hoist and Related Plant Operators,
Other include operators who operate and Fork Lift Truck Operator operates power-
monitor cranes and other hoisting driven truck fitted with lifting fork to
equipment not elsewhere classified. transport or stack merchandise and other
material in warehouse, storage yard,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: factory, railway station or other similar
establishments. Drives truck to location of
Code 8343
load; positions truck near load and moves
Title Crane, Hoist and Related Plant
levers to place fork lift below load and
Operators
raise; drives position; unloads and stacks
material by operating lifting fork. May
Family 8344
carry out routine servicing of truck.
Lifting Truck Operators
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9707
Lifting-Truck Operators drive, operate and
QP NOS Name Fork Lift
monitor lifting-truck or similar vehicle to
Operator/Driver
transport, lift and stack pallets with goods.
NSQF Level 4
8344.0100
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Lift Truck Operator
Code 8344
Title Lifting Truck Operators
Lift Truck Operator operates power-driven
truck fitted with adjustable lifting 8344.9900
platform to load, transport or stack
Lift Truck Operator, Other
merchandise and other material in
warehouse, storage yard, factory, etc.
Lifting Truck Operators, Other include
Drives truck to location of load; positions
operators who drive, operate and monitor
truck near load; moves levers to place
lifting truck or similar vehicle to transport,
platform under load to raise it;
lift and stack pallets with goods not
manipulates levers to raise platform
elsewhere classified.
carrying load sufficiently above ground
and drives truck to site of unloading or
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
stacking; unloads and stacks material by
Code 8344
operating truck platform. May tow hand
Title Lifting Truck Operators
VOLUME II B 528
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Group 835 Title Ships’ Deck Crews and Related
Workers
Ships’ Deck Crews and Related
Workers 8350.0300
Seaconny/OS (Ordinary Seaman)
Ship’s Deck Crews and Related workers
carry out deck duties on board ship and Seaconny; Sukhani Quartermaster steers
similar duties on board other water-borne vessel following designated course under
craft. direction of officer on watch. Keeps watch
on bridge during specified hours, taking
Occupations in this Group are classified over handling of helm to keep vessel on
its course, and alters course as directed.
into the following Families:
Cleans bridge and wheel house and carries
out such work as arranging signal
8350 Ships’ Deck Crews and Related
equipment, hoisting flags and signals
Workers
cleaning, lights etc. Guards ship's gangway
in port to prevent entrance of
Family 8350
unauthorised person.
Ships’ Deck Crews and Related
Workers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8350
Ship’s Deck Crews and Related Workers Title Ships’ Deck Crews and Related
carry out deck duties on board ship and Workers
similar duties on board other water-borne
craft. 8350.0400
Lascar/OS (Ordinary Seaman)
8350.0100
Serang, Deck/Bosun Lascar; Khalasi; Seaman; Deck-hand cleans
decks and deck equipment by washing
Serang, Deck, Boatswin, Deck controls and decks, chipping points, painting wood and
supervises work of deck crew. Receives metal fixtures, and splicing wires and
orders from Chief Officer, Ship, allocates cables. Breaks out rigs, overhauls
work to Tindals and Lascars and lifeboats, cargo-handling and life-saving
supervises their iron and wood work gears lowers and raises lifeboats. Takes
overhauling, cargo and lifesaving gear, depth sounding in unfamiliar or shallow
and other regular and emergency duties waters and shouts information to bridge.
are carried out efficiently by crew. Makes ready derricks and winches for
Prepares anchor to let go when vessel operation. May stow and remove cargo
arrives in port, under order of Chief from hold.
Officer, arranges cargo derricks and adjust
ship's position on wharves. Maintains ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
discipline among deck crew. Code 8350
Title Ships’ Deck Crews and Related
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Workers
Code 8350
8350.0500
VOLUME II B 529
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 8
Driver, Launch/Tug Master ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 8350
Driver, Launch drives engines of launches Title Ships’ Deck Crews and Related
and tugs. Checks different parts of engine Workers
to ensure that it is in proper working
order. Cleans, greases and oils engine 8350.0700
parts or gets this done by Oiler Cleaner. Rudderman
Feeds engine with fuel (oil) and ensures
that sufficient quantity of oil is stored in
Rudderman steers course of boat, large or
canes for use on way. Starts engine by
other water craft by manipulating rudder
regulating levers or by cranking. Increases
to desired angles. Examines before start
or decreases speed or stops engine or
of boat that rudder is in order and is
reverses direction of boat as per signal
equipped with rope, wire etc.; moves
given by Serang. Checks and regulates
rudder from position in line with keel to
feed of fuel and refills oil, greases etc., as
change vessels' course. May assist
and when needed. Checks temperature of
Boatman and Oarsman in emergency.
engine and slows down or stops engine if
temperature is high. Supervises work of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Oilers and Cleaners and diagnoses
Code 8350
mechanical defects and undertakes minor
Title Ships’ Deck Crews and Related
repairs. Maintains logbook.
Workers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
8350.0800
Code 8350
Oarsman
Title Ships’ Deck Crews and Related
Workers
Oarsman rows boats, barges and other
water-crafts using oars, sweeps etc. singly
8350.0600
or in groups. Fixes oars in braces on sides
Boatman
of boat; takes position in boat; pulls oars
by hand to propel boat; stops pulling of
Boat Man piles boat to carry men and
oars at destination or when asked by
material across waterways, working alone
Boatman; removes oars from braces. May
or in groups. Checks boat for leakage or
repair broken oars, may assist
other damage. Moors boat in convenient
Rudderman.
place for enabling entry of persons or
loading of cargo. Ensures that boats
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
capacity is not exceeded and boats
Code 8350
balance is maintained on water. Covers
Title Ships’ Deck Crews and Related
cargo if required to protect it from
Workers
weather. Gets conversant with routes.
Unmoors boat, propels and directs it by
8350.9900
means of oars, rudder, pole, sails etc.
Ships’ Deck Ratings, Barge Crews
Moors boat on reaching destination for
persons to alight and for cargo to be and Boatmen, Other
unloaded. May load and unload cargo.
VOLUME II B 530
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
Ships' Deck Ratings, Barge Crews and performing simple tasks connected with
Boatmen, Other include all other Deck mining, construction and manufacturing
Ratings, and workers engaged in operating including product-sorting; packing and
ships, barges, boats and like water unpacking produce by hand and filling
transports, not elsewhere classified. shelves; providing various street services;
ELEMENTARY OCCUPATIONS Elementary pedalling or hand-guiding vehicles to
occupations consist of simple and routine transport passengers and goods; driving
tasks which mainly require the use of animal-drawn vehicles or machinery.
hand-held tools and often some physical Supervision of other workers may be
effort. Most occupations in this division included.
require skill at the first skill level.
Occupations in this Division are classified
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: into the following Sub Divisions:
Code 8350
Title Ships’ Deck Crews and Related 91 Cleaners and Helpers
Workers 92 Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery
Labourers
93 Labourers in Mining, Construction,
Manufacturing and Transport
Division 94 Food Preparation Assistants
9
95 Street and Related Sales and
Services Workers
96 Refuse Workers and Other
Elementary Workers
Elementary Occupations
Sub Division 91
Cleaners and Helpers
Elementary Occupations involve the
performance of simple and routine tasks
Cleaners and Helpers perform various
which may require the use of hand-held
tasks in private households, hotels,
tools and considerable physical effort.
offices, hospitals and other
Tasks performed by workers in
establishments, as well as in aircraft,
elementary occupations usually include:
trains coaches, trams and similar vehicles,
cleaning, restocking supplies and
in order to keep the interiors and fixtures
performing basic maintenance in
clean, and launder and press garments
apartments, houses, kitchens, hotels,
and textiles by hand.
offices and other buildings; washing cars
Tasks performed by workers in this sub-
and windows; helping in kitchens and
major group usually include: sweeping or
performing simple tasks in food
vacuum cleaning, washing and polishing
preparation; delivering messages or
floors, furniture and other objects; taking
goods; carrying luggage and handling
care of linen and bed-making; helping
baggage and freight; stocking vending
with preparation of meals and cleaning in
machines or reading and emptying
kitchens; washing and cleaning cars and
meters; collecting and sorting refuse;
windows; pressing or laundering garments
sweeping streets and similar places;
and textiles by hand.
performing various simple farming,
fishing, hunting or trapping tasks
VOLUME II B 531
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
Occupations in this Sub Division are Domestic Servant performs general
classified into the following Groups: house-hold duties and attends to personal
comforts of master or employer. Performs
911 Domestic, Hotel and Office domestic work of routine nature such as
Cleaners and Helpers sweeping and dusting of rooms and
furniture, making beds, serving meals,
912 Vehicle, Window, Laundry and
purchasing vegetables, meat, fish etc.
Other Hand Cleaning Workers
from market, storing water and doing odd
jobs. Prepares tea, coffee and meals. Lays
the table, cleans soiled and used plates
and cooking utensils. May wash clothes
Group 911 and look after tamed animals such as cow,
dog, etc. May look after children.
Domestic, Hotel and Office
Cleaners and Helpers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9111
Title Domestic Cleaners and Helpers
Domestic, Hotel and Office Cleaners and
Helpers sweep, vacuum clean, wash,
9111.0200
polish, take care of household linen,
purchase household supplies; perform Char-Dust Cleaner and Salvager
various tasks in order to keep clean and
tidy the interiors and fixtures of hotels,
Char Dust Cleaner and Salvager cleans
offices and other establishments, as well
floors and equipment, and performs
as of aircraft, trains, buses and similar
following duties in char-house: Cleans and
vehicles.
collects char dust from floors, pump
basins, pipelines, and tank tops. Observes
Occupations in this Group are classified
operating machinery, such as char-draw
into the following Families:
mechanisms, spreaders, and char-
9111 Domestic Cleaners and Helpers collectors, for blockades or
9112 Cleaners and Helpers in Offices, malfunctioning, and reports irregularities
Hotels and Other Establishments to superiors. Fills sacks with salvaged char
dust and sews, weighs, and stores sacks.
Obtains samples of char and takes them
Family 9111
to laboratory for analysis. Delivers
Domestic Cleaners and Helpers
requisitions, runs errands, and supplies
filter blankets and wedges to other
Domestic Cleaners and Helpers sweep,
workers.
vacuum clean, wash and polish, take care
of household linen, purchase household
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
supplies, prepare food, serve meals and
Code 9111
perform various other domestic duties.
Title Domestic Cleaners and Helpers
9111.0100
9111.0300
Domestic Servant
Cleaner, Home Restoration Service
VOLUME II B 532
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
Cleaner, Home Restoration Service cleans cleaning tasks in order to keep clean and
and restores interiors of homes damaged tidy the interiors and fixtures of hotels,
by fire, smoke, or water, using commercial offices and other establishments, as well
cleaning equipment: Receives work orders as of aircraft, trains, buses and similar
and schedules from supervisor. Carries vehicles.
floor-mounted or portable commercial
carpet, upholstery, and interior cleaning 9112.0100
machines, tools, and supplies to work site.
Dusting Man, Office; Farash,
Cleans carpet, upholstery, floors, walls,
Office/House Keeping Attendant
ceilings, draperies, windows, and room
accessories. Places fans and other
Dusting Man, Office; Farash, Office
equipment in rooms to remove moisture
performs routine unskilled duties in office
from carpet, upholstery, and air. Sprays or
or establishment such as dusting of rooms
fogs carpet, upholstery, and accessories
and furniture and opening and closing
with fabric conditioners and protectors,
office. Gets rooms swept by Sweeper in
deodorizers, and disinfectants, using hand
his presence. Dusts office tables, chairs,
and power sprayers, applying knowledge
doors, windows, etc. Sprays periodically
of types of fabrics, dyes, and chemical
DDT or other insecticides. May sweep
sprays. Inspects completed restoration to
office or institution. May work as
ensure conformance to standards.
watchman and guard office or institution
Collects payments and discusses results of
during day or night.
work with customers.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9111
Code 9111
Title Domestic Cleaners and Helpers
Title Domestic Cleaners and Helpers
9112.0200
9111.9900
Cleaner Hospital
Domestic and Related Helpers,
Cleaners and Launderers, Other
Cleaner, Hospital cleans hospital patient
Domestic and Related Helpers, Cleaners
rooms, baths, laboratories, offices, halls,
and Launderers, Other include all other
and other areas: Washes beds and
domestic Helpers and Cleaners not
mattresses, and remakes beds after
elsewhere classified.
discharge of patients. Keeps utility and
storage rooms in clean and orderly
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
condition. Distributes laundered articles
Code 9111
and linens. Replaces soiled drapes and
Title Domestic Cleaners and Helpers
cubicle curtains. May disinfect and
sterilize equipment and supplies, using
Family 9112 germicides and sterilizing equipment.
Cleaners and Helpers in Offices,
Hotels and Other Establishments ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9111
Title Domestic Cleaners and Helpers
Cleaners and Helpers in Offices, Hotels
and Other Establishments perform various
VOLUME II B 533
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
9112.9900 9121.0100
Helpers and Cleaners in Offices, Dhobi
Hotels and Other Establishments,
Other Dhobi; Washer man washes and cleans
garments and other articles of washable
fabrics and presses them. Collects soiled
Helpers and Cleaners in Offices, Hotels
clothes and garments from clients, marks
and Other Establishments, Other include
them with marking ink for identification.
workers who perform various cleaning
Sorts soiled articles according to type and
tasks in order to keep clean and tidy the
treatment to be given. Fills tub with water
interiors and fixtures of hotels, offices and
and adds proper amount of soap, washing
other establishments, as well as of
soda or other chemicals and dips coloured
aircraft, trains, buses and similar vehicles
or delicate garments into soapy water or
not elsewhere classified.
chemical solution and agitates it by hand.
Spreads wet garments on flat surface, and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
scrubs with hand or brush and rinses
Code 9111
garment in clear water till dirty water
Title Domestic Cleaners and Helpers
stops coming out. Treats excessively
soiled garments of coarse cloth separately
Group 912
by applying chemicals on them, by hand,
Vehicle, Window, Laundry and
boiling them in tub or in closed oven,
Other Hand Cleaning Workers beating them with hand on stone or club
on stone or wood and washing them in
Vehicle, Window, Laundry and Other clear water in tanks, rivers and lakes. Dries
Hand Cleaning Workers clean windows, garments in open air by hanging them on
showcases or other surfaces of buildings rope, wire or spreading them on ground.
or vehicles and press, launder or dry-clean Irons dried garments using hand iron-
linen and other textiles by hand. press. May wash garments and other
textile furnishings in machine. May treat
Occupations in this Group are classified white and delicate garments with
into the following Families: chemicals (Blue and Starch) for shine and
bleaching.
9121 Hand Launderers and Pressers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
9122 Vehicle Cleaners
Code 9121
9123 Window Cleaners
Title Hand Launderers and Pressers
9129 Other Cleaning Workers
9121.0200
Family 9121
Laundry Workers (Marker, Sorter)
Hand Launderers and Pressers
Laundry Workers, Other perform variety
Hand launderers and pressers launder, of routine and low skilled tasks in laundry
press or dry-clean garments, linen and and are designated according to nature of
other textiles by hand. work performed such as MARKER marks
customer-identifying symbols on soiled
garments or other articles received for
VOLUME II B 534
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
cleaning, dyeing, pressing, etc., by writing solutions. May wash article before
code number on garment or on tag with removing spot.
pen and waterproof ink and sewing tag to
garment. SORTER sorts garments or ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
articles received from customers Code 9121
according to type and colour of material, Title Hand Launderers and Pressers
and fastness of dye.
9121.0500
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Rug Cleaner
Code 9121
Title Hand Launderers and Pressers
Rug Cleaner operates in cooperation with
one or more workers automatic rug
9121.0300
cleaning machines which soaps, scrubs,
Dry Cleaner, Hand rinses and partially dries floor coverings in
one continuous operation. Inserts edge of
Dry-Cleaner, Hand cleans by hand, rug between feed rollers and starts
woollen and silken garments, textile machine which carries rug under soap
furnishings and similar articles using spray, revolving, scrubbing brushes and
chemical solution or other dry cleaning rinsing spray. Stops machine and drags
solvents. Examines garments or articles to rub to drying room and hangs it on racks
ascertain condition and type of material or poles with help of other workers. May
and decides on type of treatment to be clean rug by hand, pouring soap solution
given. Lays article on table, treats with on surface and scrubbing brush over it.
chemical solution and rubs or brushes
parts most soiled and immerses article in ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
solution for required period. Rinses article Code 9121
in fresh solution and allows it to dry in Title Hand Launderers and Pressers
open air. May clean upholstered furniture.
May operate dry-cleaning machine. 9121.0600
Presser, Hand
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9121
Presser, Hand; Ironer, Hand presses
Title Hand Launderers and Pressers
garments, textile furnishings and similar
articles with heated hand-pressing-iron to
9121.0400
remove wrinkles caused by washing,
Spot Remover handling, etc. Spreads material on ironing
board or table; moistens cotton material
Spot-Remover removes with chemical and presses flat with heated iron. Takes
solution spots and stains from clothing’s, special care in pressing delicate articles
textile furnishings and similar articles, such as silken, woollens, and similar other
either before or after cleaning. Examines articles by spreading moist linen over
articles for condition and nature of spots them before pressing. Moves iron over
or stains. Lays article on table and applies material applying necessary heat and
correct chemical solution to stains and pressure to obtain desired effect and
rubs with brush or sponge till stain shape. May wash garment or other
dissolves. May prepare chemical material by hand or dry-clean it. May
VOLUME II B 535
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
moisten material or any part during Title Hand Launderers and Pressers
pressing.
Family 9122
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9121 Vehicle Cleaners
Title Hand Launderers and Pressers
Vehicle cleaners, wash, clean and polish
9121.0700 vehicles.
Dry Cleaner, Spot
9122.0100
Dry Cleaner, Spot identifies stains in wool,
Cleaner, Window
synthetic, and silk garments and
household fabrics and applies chemical
Cleaner, Window cleans windows, glass
solutions to remove stains, determining
partitions, mirrors, and other glass
spotting through dry-cleaning procedures
surfaces of building interior or exterior,
on the basis of type of fabric and nature of
using pail of soapy water or other cleaner,
stain: Spreads article on worktable and
sponge, and squeegee. Crawls through
positions stain over vacuum head or on
window from inside and hooks safety belt
marble slab. Sprinkles chemical solvents
to brackets for support, sets and climbs
over stain and pats area with brush or
ladder to reach second or third story, or
sponge until stain is removed. Applies
uses swing stage, or other scaffolding
chemicals to neutralize effect of solvents.
lowered from roof to reach outside
Sprays steam, water, or air over spot to
windows, or stands to reach first floor or
flush out chemicals and dry garment.
inside windows.
Applies bleaching powder to spot and
sprays with steam to remove stains from
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
certain fabrics which do not respond to
Code 9122
other cleaning solvents. May mix
Title Vehicle Cleaners
bleaching agent with hot water in vats and
9122.0201
soak material until bleached. May operate
Washer
dry cleaning machine.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Washer washes, scrubs and polishes the
interiors and exteriors of vehicles
Code 9121
(including glass) in the vehicle to protect
Title Hand Launderers and Pressers
their appearance. The individual also uses
the pressurised water to clean the
9121.9900
exterior surface before the vehicle is
Launderers, Dry Cleaners and
made ready for delivery for the first time
Pressers, Other
after PDI is done on the vehicle.
Launderers, Dry Cleaners and Pressers,
Qualification Pack Details:
Other include all laundry and dry cleaning,
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1101
service workers not elsewhere classified.
QP NOS Name Washer
NSQF Level 2
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9121
VOLUME II B 536
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Family 9129
Code 9122
Title Vehicle Cleaners Other Cleaning Workers
9122.0301 Other Cleaning Workers clean surface,
Driving Assistant materials and objects, such as carpets,
walls, swimming pools and cooling towers,
using specialized cleaning equipment and
Driving Assistant is often called Cleaner or
chemicals.
Helper. Individuals at this job need to
assist the driver by doing the washing and
cleaning of the external/internal structure
of vehicle, maintaining up keep of tool Sub Division 92
box, assisting in minor repairs and running
miscellaneous errands. Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery
Labourers
Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9701
Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery
QP NOS Name Driving Assistant
Labourers perform simple and routine
NSQF Level 2
tasks in the production of crops and
livestock, cultivation and maintenance of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
gardens and parks, exploitation and
Code 9122
conservation of forests, and conduct of
Title Vehicle Cleaners
aquaculture and fisheries operations.
Tasks performed usually include: digging,
9122.9900 raking and shovelling using hand tools;
Vehicle, Window and Related loading unloading and stacking supplies,
Cleaners, Other produce and other materials; watering,
thinning, weeding and tending crops by
Vehicle, Window and Related Cleaners,
hand or using hand tools; planting,
Other include workers who clean
harvesting picking and collecting produce
windows, showcases or other glass
by hand; feeding, watering, and cleaning
surfaces of buildings or vehicles not
animals and keeping their quarters clean;
elsewhere classified.
monitoring livestock, reporting on their
condition; preparing and operating nets,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
lines and other fishing tackle and deck
Code 9122
equipment; grading, sorting, bunching and
Title Vehicle Cleaners
packing produce into containers;
performing minor repairs on fixtures,
Family 9123
buildings equipment, vessels and fences.
Window Cleaners
Occupations in this Sub Division are
Window Cleaners wash and polish
classified into the following Groups:
windows and other glass fittings.
921 Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery
Labourers
VOLUME II B 537
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
prepares feed for bullocks and feeds them
Group 921 at prescribed time. May repair or change
shear of plough as and when required.
Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery
Labourers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9211
Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery
Title Crop Farm Labourers
Labourers perform simple and routine
tasks in the production of crops and
9211.0200
livestock, cultivation and maintenance of
Labourer, Agriculture
gardens and parks, exploitation and
conservation of forests, and conduct
Labourer, Agriculture performs variety of
aquaculture and fisheries operations.
tasks, mostly manual, connected with
farm cultivation on remuneration. Settles
Occupations in this Group are classified
wages and working hours. Receives
into the following Families:
allotment of work from Fieldman and
collects seeds, equipment, etc. Attends to
9211 Crop Farm Labourers
tasks in field in connection with planting,
9212 Livestock Farm Labourers
preparation of soil, sowing, weeding,
9213 Mixed Crop and Livestock Farm
hoeing, pruning, harvesting, plucking
Labourers
fruits or flowers, threshing, drying,
9214 Garden and Horticultural winnowing, bagging, storing, etc. Consults
Labourers Fieldman in different assignments as and
9215 Forestry Labourers when necessary. Hands over equipment at
close of day.
9216 Fishery and Aquaculture Labourers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9211
Family 9211
Title Crop Farm Labourers
Crop Farm Labourers
9211.0300
Crop farm labourers perform simple and
Picker (Tobacco)
routine tasks in the production of crops
such as fruit, nuts, grains and vegetables
Picker (Tobacco) removes stems, off-
on farms.
colour tobacco, and foreign material, such
as strings, dirt, and paper from tobacco as
9211.0100
it moves along conveyor to ensure clean
Ploughman and uniform product. May drop pickings
into bags attached to conveyor frame,
Ploughman ploughs fields to prepare soil according to whether pickings are dark
for growing crops and feeds bullocks at tobacco, green tobacco, tobacco with
scheduled hour. Collects plough and stems, or foreign material.
bullocks in morning and checks fittings,
boltings, condition of plough, etc. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Harnesses bullocks to plough and ploughs Code 9211
field using different types of plough Title Crop Farm Labourers
according to necessity. Collects, mixes and
VOLUME II B 538
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
9211.9900 Family 9215
Farm Hands and Labourers, Other
Forestry Labourers
Farm Hands and Labourers, Other include
workers who help with farm work by Forestry Labourers perform simple and
performing a variety of simple farming routine tasks to cultivate and maintain
tasks not elsewhere classified. natural and plantation forests, and
logging, felling and sawing trees.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9211 9215.0100
Title Crop Farm Labourers
Labourer, Plantation
Labourer, Plantation performs various low
Family 9212
skilled tasks in connection with preparing
land, planting, weeding, spraying of
Livestock Farm Labourers
insecticide, picking tea leaves, plucking
coffee seeds, etc. and may be designated
Livestock Farm Labourers perform simple according to nature of work performed
and routine tasks in farm production of such as: Nursery worker prepares beds in
animals, including poultry and insects. prescribed manner and germinates tea
seeds, rubber seeds etc. Prunes such as
Family 9213 sowing, shootings, weeds out wild growth
and performs related tasks. Planting
worker prepares land for cultivating tea
Mixed Crop and Livestock Farm
plants, digs holes for planting germinated
Labourers
seeds and plants shade trees to protect
tea and coffee plants from heat. Weeding
Mixed Crop and Livestock Farm Labourers
worker weeds out wild growth around
perform simple and routine tasks in farm
tea, rubber and coffee plants using spade,
production of both crops and animals.
sickle, knife, etc. Spraying worker mixes
pesticides such as cuprosona, fungi
copper, and D.D.T. with water and sprays
Family 9214 it on plants, using spraying machine.
Picker; Plucker (Coffee, Tea) picks ripe
Garden and Horticultural Labourers coffee berries or tea leaves from plants by
hand, cuts off protruding branches of
bush using tipping knife and performs
Garden and Horticultural Labourers
variety of low skilled tasks on tea or coffee
perform simple and routine tasks in
estates.
operations to cultivate and maintain
trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants in
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
parks and private gardens, to produce
Code 9215
saplings, bulbs and seeds, or grow
Title Forestry Labourers
vegetables and flowers by intensive
cultivation techniques.
9215.0200
Tappers
VOLUME II B 539
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
storage operations, and operate human
Tappers, make cuts in trunk of trees using powered and animal drawn vehicles and
special knives for collecting saps, juices, machinery.
resins, or gums, etc. Tasks performed by workers in this sub-
major group usually include: digging holes
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: and spreading excavated materials, sand,
Code 9216 soil, and gravel using hand-held tools;
Title Fishery and Aquaculture sorting, loading, unloading, moving
Laboratories stacking and storing materials, equipment,
products, supplies, baggage and cargo by
hand; cleaning machinery, equipment,
9215.9900 tools and work sites; packing and
unpacking material and products and
Plantation Labourers and Related
filling containers and shelves with
Workers, Other
products by hand; operating human
powered and animal drawn vehicles and
Plantation Labourers and Related
machinery.
Workers, other include all those
plantation labourers and related workers
Occupations in this Sub Division are
not elsewhere classified.
classified into the following Groups:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
931 Mining and Construction
Code 9215
Labourers
Title Forestry Labourers
932 Manufacturing Labourers
933 Transport and Storage Labourers
Family 9216
Group 931
Fishery and Aquaculture Labourers Mining and Construction Labourers
Fishery and Aquaculture Labourers, Mining and construction labourers
perform simple and routine tasks to perform simple and routine manual tasks
cultivate, catch and harvest fish and in mining, quarrying, civil engineering and
seafood in aquaculture and inland, coastal building operations.
and deep sea fishing operations.
Occupations in this Group are classified
Sub Division 93 into the following Families:
Labourers in Mining, Construction, 9311 Mining and Quarrying Labourers
Manufacturing and Transport 9312 Civil Engineering Labourers
9313 Building Construction Labourers
Labourers in Mining, Construction,
Manufacturing and Transport perform
Family 9311
simple and routine manual tasks in
Mining and Quarrying Labourers
mining, quarrying, civil engineering,
building, manufacturing, transport and
VOLUME II B 540
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
Mining and Quarrying Labourers perform ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
routine tasks in mining and quarrying Code 9311
operations. Title Mining and Quarrying Labourers
9311.0100 9311.0200
Mines, Quarrymen, Related Digger (Mine and Quarry)
Workers
Digger works in underground or surface
Miners, Quarrymen and Related Workers mine, pit, or quarry, or at tipple, mill, or
works in mining, quarrying, well drilling preparation plant, performing any
and other related activities. Dig, drill, combination of following tasks: Cleans
excavate, load ore, coal or rocks in to cars. working areas and haulage tracks; digs
Perform work requiring simple and and maintains drainage ditches; or shovels
routine tasks connected with mining and muck, ore, coal, or rock aside, into cars, or
quarrying. onto conveyors. Pushes loaded mine cars
from working face to haulage road and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: attaches cars together for transportation
to surface. Positions and adjusts bits on
Code 9311
drill shaft and places cables, jacks, roof
Title Mining and Quarrying Labourers
bolts, and related equipment in specified
locations. Trims protrusions from walls
9311.0101
and roofs of underground passageways
Mazdoor/Helper
and rooms. Strips (cleans) residue of rock
and dirt from exposed coal, ore, or rock
Mazdoor or Helpers in mines perform a
formations. Loads, separates, or sorts
variety of duties. A mining helper could be
materials at working face, using shovel or
doing any of the following on a regular
wheelbarrow. Throws calcium or salt
work day-transporting material and
around interiors of railroad cars to
equipment within mine, cleaning the area
prevent coal or ore from freezing to cars
to build temporary roads, loading and
during winter.
unloading, reject handling, spotting,
erecting or dismantling scaffolding at a
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
construction site on the mine, bricklaying,
Code 9311
clean and maintain the mining premises,
Title Mining and Quarrying Labourers
assist trained operators in installing,
dismantling or dispatch of any machinery.
9311.9900
In addition to this a mazdoor must be
Mining and Quarrying Labourers,
safety conscious ensuring everybody’s
safety and others around him in all tasks Other
he is asked to perform.
Mining and Quarrying Labourers, Other
Qualification Pack Details: include workers who perform simple and
QP NOS Reference MIN/Q0408 routine tasks in connection with mining or
QP NOS Name Mazdoor/Helper quarrying not elsewhere classified.
NSQF Level 1
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9311
VOLUME II B 541
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
Title Mining and Quarrying Labourers machine to cut portion of tie so that tie
plate can be inserted to hold rail. Drills
Family 9312 holes through rails, tie plates, and
fishplates for insertion of bolts and spike,
Civil Engineering Labourers using power drill. Operates single-or
multiple-head spike driving machine to
drive spike into tie and secure rail.
Civil Engineering Labourers perform
Operates track-wrench machine to tighten
routine tasks in connection with the
or loosen bolts at joints that hold ends of
building and maintenance of roads,
rails together. Operates rail saw to cut
railways, dams and other civil engineering
rails to specified lengths. Operates
projects.
portable grinder to grind worn ends of
rails. Sprays ties, fishplates, and joints
9312.0100
with oil to protect them from weather.
Labourer, Other
May paint railroad signs, such as speed
limits and gate-crossing warnings. May
Labourer performs simple manual tasks of oversee workers and act as section leader.
routine nature requiring physical strength,
and are engaged in lifting and carrying ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
loads, civil construction works, cleaning
Code 9312
and sweeping machine rooms, sprinkling
Title Civil Engineering Labourers
water on khas tattis, etc. and include
those not elsewhere classified: Labourers,
9312.9900
Construction and Maintenance Workers
Construction and Maintenance
Labourers, Road Construction and
Labourers, Other
Maintenance Labourers, Telephone,
Telegraph lines and Cables Waterman,
Khas Tatti. Mazdoor, Textile Construction and Maintenance Labourers,
Other include workers who perform
simple and routine tasks in connection
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
with the building and maintenance of
Code 9312
roads, dams and similar constructions not
Title Civil Engineering Labourers
elsewhere classified.
9312.0200
Track Repairer (Rail Transport)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9312
Track Repairer (Rail Transport) installs and
Title Civil Engineering Labourers
repairs railroad track on specified territory
of railroad, using portable grinder, spike
Family 9313
puller, spike driver, and tie adz, to grind
Building Construction Labourers
ends of rails, remove old spikes, drive new
spikes, cut ties to fit fishplates, and
perform related maintenance, working as Building Construction Labourers perform
member of crew: Operates single-or routine tasks in connection with building
multiple-head spike puller to pull old construction and demolition work.
spikes from tie. Raises rail, using hydraulic 9313.0100
jack, to facilitate removal of old tie and Well Digger Helper
installation of new tie. Operates tie-adzing
VOLUME II B 542
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
QP NOS Name Helper Bar Bender
Well Digger Helper assists Well Digger in and Fixer
digging well by hauling and emptying NSQF Level 1
excavated material and performing other
miscellaneous tasks. Carries bricks, lays ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
them in order and soaks them with water Code 9313
before use. Digs well by spade and bails Title Building Construction Labourers
out mud in basket. Lays tripod structure
and prepares mortar as directed. Assists in 9313.0301
setting earthen or cement rings in
Helper Mason
creating pressure and lowering outer
constructed wall into dug space of well.
Helper Mason needs to support Assistant
Keeps bullocks on move to pull mud,
Mason and Mason which are at level‐2
bucket out of well through string and
and level‐3 in semi‐skilled and skilled
attends to other tasks as directed.
category for carrying out the related
works such as shifting of materials,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
handling tools, tackles and housekeeping.
Code 9313
The responsibilities include site
Title Building Construction Labourers
development and clearance, provide
support for laying of bricks and blocks,
9313.0201
mortar and cement concrete mixing,
Helper Bar Bender and Fixer rendering coat plastering, help in setting
and layout, knowing importance of
Helper Bar Bender and Fixer needs to scaffolding and have the basic knowledge
support the Assistant Bar Bender and in the environment, health, safety
Steel Fixer and Bar Bender and Steel Fixer pertaining to the trade.
which are at level‐2 and level‐3 in semi‐
skilled and skilled category for carrying Qualification Pack Details:
out the related works such as selecting, QP NOS Reference CON/Q0101
straightening, cutting, shifting of QP NOS Name Helper Mason
materials, handling tools, tackles and NSQF Level 1
housekeeping with safety. The
responsibilities include to identify ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
types of bars and size, straighten, cut,
Code 9313
tying steel cages/reinforcements using
Title Building Construction Labourers
hand tools. Follow the Plan for storage,
transportation and fixing the
9313.0401
reinforcement in position. Should be able
Helper Carpenter-Shuttering and
to understand the size and shape of
Scaffolding
simple rings and links dimension and
make manually with guidance a few
shapes, along with the knowledge about Helper Carpenter-Shuttering and
the environment, health, safety and Scaffolding needs to support and help the
general awareness of related trades. Assistant Shuttering Carpenter (Level‐2),
Qualification Pack Details: Assistant Scaffolder (Level‐2) in semi‐
skilled categories for carrying out the
QP NOS Reference CON/Q0201
related works such as shifting of material,
VOLUME II B 543
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
handling of tools, preparation job site and 9313.0601
housekeeping. A Helper Carpenter provide Helper Laboratory and Field
support in making, assembling, erecting
Technician
and dismantling all types of conventional
formwork and scaffolding arrangements
Helper Laboratory and Field Technician
and systems. The Helper is expected to
provides support to the Assistant Lab
know basics of carpentry and also about
Technician/Laboratory In Charge for
the system formwork and shuttering.
organizing, selecting, sifting and carrying
the materials, collection of samples and
Qualification Pack Details:
finally to maintain and upkeep the
QP NOS Reference CON/Q0301
laboratory premises, equipment and
QP NOS Name Helper Carpenter-
instruments.
Shuttering and
Scaffolding
Qualification Pack Details:
NSQF Level 1
QP NOS Reference CON/Q0401
QP NOS Name Helper Laboratory
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and Field Technician
Code 9313
NSQF Level 1
Title Building Construction Labourers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
9313.0501
Code 9313
Helper Electrician
Title Building Construction Labourers
Helper Electrician needs to work as helper 9313.0701
and perform task under continuous
Helper Painter and Decorator
instruction and close supervision of
Assistant Electrician level‐2 and above. He
Helper Painter and Decorator needs to
is expected to shift and store materials,
work as helper category tradesman and
handle tools and tackles, preparatory
perform tasks under continuous and close
works of materials and surfaces,
supervision of Assistant Painter and
assistance in wall chasing, conduit fixing,
Decorator Level‐2 is expected to handle
cable laying and other allied electrical
shifting and storing of materials, handling
works and relevant housekeeping. He
tools and tackles relevant to painting
should have the basic knowledge in the
including site development and clearance,
environment, health and safety aspects
support in identification and preparation
relevant to the trade.
of paints and surfaces, mixing of colours
and paints and the housekeeping
Qualification Pack Details:
activities. Should ensure trade specific
QP NOS Reference CON/Q0601
compliance to environment, health and
QP NOS Name Helper Electrician
safety aspects.
NSQF Level 1
Qualification Pack Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
QP NOS Reference CON/Q0501
Code
QP NOS Name Helper Painter and
Title
Decorator
NSQF Level 1
VOLUME II B 544
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Packer, Hand; Carton Filler; Boxer; Case
Code Packer packs material and products by
Title hand in bags, barrels, baskets, boxes,
cartons, and crates for purpose of storage
9313.9900 or transport performing any combination
of following duties. Examines product for
Building Construction Labourers,
brittleness, fragility, moisture and other
Other
characteristics. Collects packaging
containers and cleans them. Lines and
Building Construction Labourers, Other
pads crates. Assembles cartons from
include those who perform simple and
flattened state. Wraps protective material
routine tasks in connection with various
around product. Weighs containers and
aspects of building construction work not
adjusts quantity. Places or pours product
elsewhere classified.
into containers or fills containers from
spout or chute. Inserts excelsior, shredded
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
paper, wood wool or paper trays on top of
Code 9313 product. Sews bag, fits lids on container,
Title Building Construction Labourers nails, wires or otherwise closes
containers. Stamps grade, brand, and date
Group 932 of packing on containers. Visually inspects
materials, products and containers at each
Manufacturing Labourers step of packaging process. May be
designated according to whether high
production or small lot packaging as
Manufacturing Labourers perform a
PACKAGING-LINE ATTENDANT, FANCY
variety of manual tasks in manufacturing,
PACKER or according to goods packed,
assist the work of Machine Operators and
machines handled or industry in which
assemblers, and undertake product-
employed such as PACKER BAGS; PACKER
sorting and hand-assembling of
BIDI; PACKER, BISCUITS; PACKER,
components.
CHEMICAL PRODUCTS; PACKER, CIGAR;
PACKER, GRAIN; PACKER, MATCH BOXES;
Occupations in this Group are classified
BOTTLING MACHINE OPERATOR; SEALING
into the following Families:
MACHINE OPERATOR, BALE PRESSER.
9321 Hand Packers
Qualification Pack Details:
9329 Manufacturing Labourers, Not
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q 6102
Elsewhere Classified
QP NOS Name Packer/Packing
Assistant/Packing
Family 9321 Executive
Hand Packers NSQF Level 2
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Hand Packers weigh, pack and label
Code 9321
materials and products by hand.
Title Hand Packers
9321.0101
Packer, Hand
VOLUME II B 545
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
9321.0102 9321.0205
Packager and Despatcher Tagger and Labeller
The individual at work uses computers, Tagger and Labeller is also known as
design or planto packs the faceted and/or ‘Dispatcher’ or ‘Packager’, the Tagger and
polished gemstones, ready or dispatch. Labeller packages the manufactured
jewellery, puts tag and label on the it and
sends to sales for dispatch. The individual
Qualification Pack Details: at work checks the products to be
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q7010 dispatched against design, tags the
QP NOS Name Packager and jewellery, packs it, labels the packet,
Despatcher records and sends for dispatch to
NSQF Level 2 customer.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code
Title
Qualification Pack Details:
9321.0201 QP NOS Reference G&J/Q1010
QP NOS Name Tagger and Labeller
Labeller
NSQF Level 5
Labeller affixes labels indicating
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
information such as size, colour grade or
Code
process code, on merchandise, material,
Title
products, containers or bottles by hand or
machine. Collects appropriate labels
9321.0300
markings, descriptions or designs to be
affixed on container. Lines articles and Stenciler
containers to be labelled. Inspects items
and affixes or pastes labels at appropriate Stenciler marks size, lot number, contents,
places using hand. May use labelling or other identifying information or
machine. May be designated according to symbols on containers or directly on
product, material or container labelled as article by placing stencil on container or
LABELLER, CIGAR; LABELLER, BOTTLES; article and rubbing ink or paint brush
LABELLER, CARRIAGE; LABELLER, across open lettering, or by spraying paint
LUGGAGE; LABELLER, WAGGON. on it. Lines and inspects containers or
articles to be stencilled. Selects
Qualification Pack Details: appropriate stencil and places stencil on
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q8401 container, package or box rubs ink using
QP NOS Name Labeller hand brush or sprays paint across cut-out
NSQF Level 3 letterings or design. May mix paints or
lacquers. May be designated according to
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: type of container stencilled as CARTON
STENCILLER; DRUM STENCILLER; SACK
Code 9321
STENCILLER.
Title Hand Packers
VOLUME II B 546
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: weighing as CHARGE WEIGHER (Ore Dress;
Code 9321 smelt and refining).
Title Hand Packers
Qualification Pack Details:
9321.0400 QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4303
Stamper, Hand QP NOS Name Weigher
NSQF Level 2
Stamper, Hand impresses stamp on bales,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
bags, boxes or other containers to
indicate nature of contents. Collects Code 9321
appropriate stamp-impression. Lines and Title Hand Packers
inspects article; places stamp on ink or
paint pad and presses stamp on article to
leave mark or impression. May use 9321.1102
stamping machine. Issuing and Return In charge
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Issue and Return In charge use the
Code 9321 computer to note all the details of a
Title Hand Packers diamond weight, shape, stage of
processing, person issued to or returned
9321.1101 from, before issuing it to a worker for
Weigher processing. Bar-coding and scanning
process may also be used.
Weigher; Scaleman weighs materials and
Qualification Pack Details:
products to determine conformance to
weight specifications for use in production QP NOS Reference G&J/Q4303
processes or for purpose of trade and QP NOS Name Issuing and Return
commerce using balance, platform or In Charge
floor scales. Checks and adjusts scale for NSQF Level 2
correct balance; places material on scale
and adds or removes portions to obtain ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
specified weight; weighs product to Code
ascertain standard or measures out Title
specified quantities for production
processes or for commerce and trade. 9321.1103
May record amount of weight or note
Diamond Bagger and Flueter
weights on material or ticket. May
perform, mixing and blending of
Diamond bagger and flueter counts
ingredients. May be designated according
diamonds and gemstones and puts into a
to material and product weighed as COAL
bag as per the product requirement for
WEIGHER; COMMERCIAL GOODS
any given jewellery design.
WEIGHER; GRAIN WEIGHER; PARCEL
WEIGHER; DYESTUFF WEIGHER; INGOT
Qualification Pack Details:
WEIGHER (Iron and steel) or scale used as
QP NOS Reference G&J/Q2505
BALANCE-TANK OPERATOR (Ore Dressing,
Smelt and refining) or purpose of
VOLUME II B 547
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
QP NOS Name Diamond Bagger containers through cleaning and sterilizing
and Flueter operations. Examines containers for
NSQF Level 4 cleanliness and defects, such as dents and
cracks. Cleans and lubricates equipment.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: May manually clean containers prior to
Code machine cleaning, using sponge or brush.
Title
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
9321.1200 Code 9321
Counter Title Hand Packers
Counter counts number of units of raw
9321.1401
materials, products or other articles
received, transferred or produced. Machining Assistant or Helper
Observes and counts material using
fingers to verify receipt or dispatch of Machining Assistant or Helper is
items on requisition or invoice or make responsible for small time routine jobs like
into unit of specified quantity and cleaning, washing, fetching and holding
number. May mark identifying codes, tool for the operators, loading and
figures or letters on articles. May weigh unloading of work pieces on the machine
item. May pack produce. May record setup, bringing raw material and spare
number and kind of defects on parts from the stores etc.
unsatisfactory units for quality control
purposes. May issue receipts. May be Qualification Pack Details:
designated according to item counted BIDI QP NOS Reference ASC/Q 3502
COUNTER, POST CARD COUNTER, QP NOS Name Machining Assistant
CURRENCY COUNTER, COUNTER, PAPER or Helper L 2
SHEETS. NSQF Level 2
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9321 Code 9321
Title Hand Packers Title Hand Packers
9321.1300 9321.9900
Container Washer, Machine Hand Packers, Others
Container Washer, Machine tends Hand Packers and Other Manufacturing
machine that cleans and sterilizes Labourers, Other include workers who
containers, such as barrels, fruit juice pack materials or products by hand and
bottles, milk cans, and baking pans: perform a variety of simple routine tasks
Moves controls to fill washing and connected with manufacturing not
sterilizing tanks with water and steam, elsewhere classified.
and to regulate temperature in cleaning
tank. Dumps specified amounts of ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
chemicals into cleaning tank. Loads
Code 9321
containers on conveyor that carries
Title Hand Packers
VOLUME II B 548
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
Family 9329 allows it to evaporate through solar heat.
May supervise raking of salt crystals and
Manufacturing Labourers, Not other operations after salt crystals are
formed.
Elsewhere Classified
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Manufacturing Labourers not elsewhere
Code 9329
classified assist the work of Machine
Title Manufacturing Labourers Not
Operators and Assemblers and perform a
Elsewhere Classified
variety of manual tasks in manufacturing,
excluding packing and labelling finished
9329.0300
products.
Salt Reclamation Worker
9329.0100
Salt Reclamation Workers; Salt Pan
Khatedar, Salt Production
Worker, Agaria; Kharwa performs variety
of manual tasks in production of salt. Digs
Khatedar, Salt Production; Field Assistant
and levels ground; raises bund around
controls raking operation in set of salt
marked area to form beds of desired sizes;
pans (called Khata) and ensures collection
repairs bunds, ridges, crystallizers, plat
and stacking of salt. Patrols salt-bed
forms, sifting ground, storage ground etc.
reservoirs to check raking of scum off
Regulates and controls brine-feed into
surface of brine. Directs Salt
crystallizers; ensures formation of proper
Pan/Reclamation Workers in removing of
size of crystals by solar evaporation;
dirt, trash and other refuge from salt-beds
removes rock and other refuse from beds;
and in scooping out of precipitated salt for
fills bed with sea-water; plugs breaches or
bagging. May supervise work of bagging
holes in bund to prevent leakage of water.
and transporting of salt bags to
Rakes surface of salt-layers and scrapes
warehouse.
and collects salt at ridges when ready; lifts
salt to drying and sifting ground, and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
thence to storage grounds. Builds heaps
Code 9329
of uniform size of specified dimensions
Title Manufacturing Labourers Not
and shape and covers them with grass
Elsewhere Classified
leaves, etc. from protection against dust,
rain, etc. May bag salt or transport salt
9329.0200
bags to warehouse.
Mukadam, Salt Production
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Mukadam, Salt Production directs Code 9329
preparation of beds for collection of sea- Title Manufacturing Labourers Not
water for salt production. Visits site and Elsewhere Classified
marks area for salt-beds. Directs assistants
in levelling of ground, raising or repairing 9329.0400
of bunds and cutting of trenches to let
Checker
water into bed; cleans rock, clay and other
refuse from bed surface. Lets in sea water
Checker verifies quantity, quality,
to fill reservoir to determined level and
condition, value and type of material,
VOLUME II B 549
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
product, purchased, sold or produced reports and records defects to improve
against records, reports or specifications. and control quality of products. May be
Examines articles for defects in making or designated according article, material or
flows in material and returns defective product tested as Tester, Gas Fittings;
work for correction or as rejects; checks Tester, Pottery, Warehouse; Tester,
packages, bottles etc., for proper Rubber Goods.
markings and labels according to
instructions; checks and examines ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
incoming and outgoing goods and Code 9329
materials against lists and delivery notes Title Manufacturing Labourers Not
for quality, quantity or number and Elsewhere Classified
reports or records defects or deficiencies.
May sort data or items into 9329.0600
predetermined sequence, groups,
Sorter
quantity. May record items verified. May
be designated according to material
Sorter sorts material and products for
handled, industry in which employed or
quality, condition, grade, size or colour
type of establishment worked as
according to specification or standard by
CURRENCY CHECKER; CARGO CHECKER;
visual examination, measuring or simple
WAREHOUSE CHECKER; CHECKER,
mechanical aids. Picks up material or
POTTERY WARE; CHECKER, GARMENTS.
products by hand and examines them by
sight and touch for defects such as
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
discolouring, quality, cracks and sorts
Code 9329
them according to class, grades, sizes,
Title Manufacturing Labourers Not
quality, colour and other characteristics.
Elsewhere Classified
Discards inferior or defective items and
foreign matter. Mats, counts, tags,
9329.0500
bunches or places together lots of
Tester identical or similar products in racks,
packing boxes, containers, baskets, crates
Tester makes routine examination of for storages, shipment or other processes.
material, goods and products for quality, Records numbers, sizes, quantities of
shape, size or functioning, visually or by sorted materials and products for
means of measuring aids or by simple identification. May affix identifying
operation with testing apparatus. information on sorted material and
Examines articles, products visually or by products. May be designated according to
means of simple instruments or devices product sorted as WOOL SORTER, HAIR
for defects and records reports or marks SORTER, BRICK SORTER; ROOFING-TILE
findings. Tests pipe connections and SORTER, SEWER PIPE SORTER, or
fittings for strength, gas and water according to work performed APPLE
tightness with pressure gauze or SORTER, POTATO GRADER; COCOON
compressed air. Examines pottery wares SORTER etc.
for shape, size, functioning etc., by means
of rule, gauzes, or instruments or by ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
simple operation with testing apparatus; Code 9329
compares test results with specifications,
VOLUME II B 550
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
Title Manufacturing Labourers Not Transport and Storage Labourers propel
Elsewhere Classified cycles and similar vehicles and drive
animal-drawn vehicles to transport
9329.0701 passengers or goods, drive animal-drawn
Accessory Fitter machinery, handle freight and baggage
and stock shelves
Accessory Fitter is responsible for
Occupations in this Group are classified
installing and fitting vehicle accessories
including vehicle exterior, interior, media into the following Families:
and entertainment and security related
9331 Hand and Pedal Vehicle Drivers
accessories depending on vehicle type and
model. 9332 Drivers of Animal-Drawn Vehicles
and Machinery
Qualification Pack Details: 9333 Freight Handlers
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q1102
9334 Shelf Fillers
QP NOS Name Accessory Fitter
NSQF Level 4
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9329
Family 9331
Title Manufacturing Labourers Not
Hand and Pedal Vehicle Drivers
Elsewhere Classified
Hand or pedal vehicle drivers propel
9329.0801
cycles and similar vehicles to transport
Parts Picker
passengers or goods.
Parts Picker needs to issue different parts
9331.0100
and assemblies according to production
Driver, Cycle Rickshaw
and shipping schedules picking these up
from Stores/warehouse.
Driver, Cycle Rickshaw drives cycle
Qualification Pack Details: rickshaw on hire or as paid by employee
to transport passengers from one place to
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q6103
another, observing road signals and traffic
QP NOS Name Parts Picker Level 3
rules. Drives passengers to destination
NSQF Level 3
and helps in loading and unloading
luggage. Cleans and oils rickshaw and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
attends to minor repairs. Settles and
Code 9329
collects fare if plying on hire.
Title Manufacturing Labourers Not
Elsewhere Classified
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9331
Group 933
Title Hand and Pedal Vehicle Drivers
Transport and Storage Labourers
9331.0300
Hand Cartman
VOLUME II B 551
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
Hand Cartman pulls or pushes hand cart ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to transport light goods and materials Code 9331
from one place to another. Loads and Title Hand and Pedal Vehicle Drivers
unloads goods. May also stack material,
make deliveries, collect payments and 9331.0700
obtain and issue receipts.
Transport Service Operator
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Transport Service Operator performs
Code 9331
variety of routine and low skilled tasks in
Title Hand and Pedal Vehicle Drivers
operating transport services such as
examining bogie wheels and axle boxes,
9331.0400
lighting signal lamps before sunset,
Traffic Hand, Gliding washing and cleaning coaches at stations,
closing and operating railway gates,
Traffic Hand, Gliding performs waking up Train Guards and Engine
miscellaneous manual tasks in connection Drivers at night for duty, fixing gangway
with flight of glider at glider station. for aircraft passengers setting control pole
Pushes glider from hanger to landing or of trams with overhead electric line etc.,
launching spot. Picks it using pegs or and are designated according to nature of
pointed stacks and attaches end of wire- work performed such as WHEEL MAN;
rope (which is spread on ground and CALL BOY (RAILWAY); LAMP MAN
other end of which is attached to winch- (RAILWAY); CARRIAGE CLEANER; GATE
engine) to glider. Removes picketing aids MAN (RAILWAY); POLEMAN TRAM, etc.
from ground when Pilot, Glider is seated
and informs Signalman to signal Winch- ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
engine Operator to operate machine Code 9331
when Pilot, Glider is ready. Pushes glider Title Hand and Pedal Vehicle Drivers
after landing, to launching spot. May
signal Winch-engine Operator, attach 9331.9900
glider with aeroplane and clean glider or
Hand Pedal Vehicle Drivers, Other
runway.
Hand or Pedal Vehicle Drivers, Other
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
include workers who propel cycles and
Code 9331
similar vehicles to transport passengers or
Title Hand and Pedal Vehicle Drivers
goods not elsewhere classified.
9331.0600
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Transport Equipment Operators
Code 9331
and Drivers, Other Title Hand and Pedal Vehicle Drivers
Transport Equipment Operators and Family 9332
Drivers, other include all other workers Drivers of Animal-Drawn Vehicles
engaged in driving and operating
and Machinery
transport equipment, not elsewhere
classified.
VOLUME II B 552
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
Drivers of animal-drawn vehicles and 9332.0300
machinery drive animal-drawn vehicles to Mahout
transport passengers or goods, as well as
animal-drawn machinery usually in
Mahout rides and leads elephant to
connection with farming.
transport men and material from one
place to another. May also train elephant
9332.0100 for ceremonial occasions, processions and
Horse Carriage Driver for specific work, e.g., log felling, lifting,
stacking etc. May groom and feed
Horse Carriage Driver drives two to four elephant.
wheeled carriage pulled by one or more
horses to transport passengers from one ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
place to another, on hire or as paid Code 9332
employee. Harnesses and hitches horses Title Drivers of Animal-Drawn Vehicles
to carriage. Drives carriage observing road and Machinery
signals and traffic rules. Loads and
unloads baggage. Settles and collects fare 9332.0400
from passengers when plying on hire. May Pack Animal Driver
be known as TONGA, EKKA, PHAETON,
TAMTAM, BUGGY, OR VICTORIA DRIVER.
Pack Animal Driver drives animal laden
May groom and feed horses and clean
with goods and material to be transported
carriage and stable in absence of
from one place to another. Loads and
Stableman.
unloads animals. Drives them walking or
riding. Feeds animals and cleans stables.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9332 ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Title Drivers of Animal-Drawn Vehicles
Code 9332
and Machinery
Title Drivers of Animal-Drawn Vehicles
9332.0200
and Machinery
Cart Driver
9332.0500
Cart Driver drives cart drawn by one or Supervisor, Animal-Drawn and
two animals, on hire or as paid employee,
Manually Operated Transport
to transport men and material from one
Equipment
place to another. Loads and unloads cart.
Feeds animals and cleans stables. Settles
Supervisors, Animal Drawn and Manually
and collects fares when plying on hire.
Operated Transport Equipment, Other
May stack material, make deliveries,
include all other workers engaged in
collect payments and obtain and issue
supervising, hiring and plying of horse
receipts.
carriages, carts, rickshaws, dolies and
other animal drawn and manually
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
operated vehicles and transport
Code 9332
equipment, not elsewhere classified.
Title Drivers of Animal-Drawn Vehicles
and Machinery
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
VOLUME II B 553
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
Code 9332 FRAGILE AND EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS.
Title Drivers of Animal-Drawn Vehicles LOADER, BULK MATERIALS. LOADER,
and Machinery HEAVY MACHINERY. LOADER, RAILWAY
WAGGONS. LOADER, SHIP. LOADER,
9332.9900 INLAND WATERCRAFT. LOADER, ROAD
Animal and Animal Drawn Vehicle TRANSPORT. LOADER, ANIMAL OR HAND
DRAWN VEHICLES, etc.
Drivers, Other
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Animal and Animal Drawn Vehicle Drivers,
Code 9333
Other include all other workers engaged
Title Freight Handlers
in driving other type of animals and
animal drawn vehicles, not elsewhere
9333.0101
classified.
Loader/Loading and Unloading
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Operator
Code 9332 Loader/Loading and Unloading needs to
Title Drivers of Animal-Drawn Vehicles safely load and unload different vehicles,
and Machinery parts, assemblies, components etc.
internally to various departments of a
manufacturing process and on to the
vehicles for dispatch based on
Family 9333 requirements.
Freight Handlers Qualification Pack Details:
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q 6101
QP NOS Name Loader/Loading and
Freight handlers carry out tasks such as
Unloading
packing, carrying, loading and unloading
Operator
furniture and other household items, or
NSQF Level 2
loading and unloading ship and aircraft
cargoes and other freight, or carrying and
stacking goods in various warehouses. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9333
Title Freight Handlers
9333.0100
Loader and Unloader
9333.0201
Loaders and Unloaders load and unload
cargo and freight in ships, railway Warehouse Worker
waggons, boats, aircraft, motor transport,
conveyers, cranes and other animal or Warehouse Worker stores the agriculture
hand drawn vehicles, performing such produce received and transports them to
operation as shifting, stacking, counting the end-customers on receiving the
loads or bundles, and may be designated orders. The person is responsible for
according to type of freight handled or receiving, sorting, storing the agricultural
nature of transport in which engaged, produce, keeping records; assist in
such as: LOADER AIRCRAFT; LOADER documenting and organizing for
VOLUME II B 554
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
transportation of goods stored to aircraft cargoes and other freight, or
customer locations. Needs to ensure carrying and stacking goods in various
quality and safety of agricultural produce warehouses not elsewhere classified.
storage in the warehouse. DO9-1 9 DO9-2 0 DOX-1 WORKERS NOT
CLASSIFIED BY OCCUPATIONS Workers
Qualification Pack Details: classified in this Division are those persons
QP NOS Reference AGR/Q7802 seeking employment who have not
QP NOS Name Warehouse Worker received any professional, technical or
NSQF Level 3 vocational training or work experience;
persons reporting occupations that cannot
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: be identified; persons reporting
occupations not sufficiently described to
Code 9333
permit classification and workers not
Title Freight Handlers
reporting any occupation. Excluded are
9333.0202
those persons seeking employment only
Loader, Transport
in specific occupations.
Associate/Loader/Unloader
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Loader/Unloader in the Logistics industry
Code 9333
is also known as Loader, Transport
Title Freight Handlers
Associate. Individuals in this role need to
identify goods based on the product code,
Family 9334
unload them from the truck onto the
Shelf Fillers
inbound area and move them to the
staging area. A similar sequence is done
for loading. Their responsibilities include Shelf Fillers stock shelves and display
identifying damaged goods and moving areas and keep stock clean and in order in
goods safely. supermarkets and other retail and
wholesale shops.
Qualification Pack Details:
Sub Division 94
QP NOS Reference LSC/Q1110
QP NOS Name Loader/Unloader
Food Preparation Assistants
NSQF Level 2
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: Food Preparation Assistants prepare and
Code 9333 cook to order a small variety of pre-
Title Freight Handlers cooked food or beverages, clear tables,
clean kitchen areas and wash dishes.
9333.9900 Tasks performed by workers in this sub
major group usually include: preparing
Freight Handlers, Other
simple or pre-prepared foods and
beverages such as sandwiches, pizzas, fish
Freight Handlers, Other include all other
and chips, salads, and coffee; washing,
freight handlers who carry out tasks such
cutting, measuring and mixing foods for
as packing, carrying, loading and
cooking; operating cooking equipment
unloading furniture and other household
such as grills, microwaves and deep-fat
items, or loading and unloading ship and
fryers; cleaning kitchens, food preparation
VOLUME II B 555
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
areas and service areas; cleaning cooking Kitchen Helper performs any combination
and general utensils used in kitchens and of following duties to maintain kitchen
restaurants. work areas and restaurant equipment and
utensils in clean and orderly condition:
Occupations in this Sub Division are Sweeps and mops floors. Washes
classified into the following Groups: worktables, walls, refrigerators, and meat
blocks. Segregates and removes trash and
garbage and places it in designated
941 Food Preparation Assistants
containers. Steam-cleans or hoses-out
garbage cans. Sorts bottles, and breaks
Group 941
disposable ones in bottle-crushing
Food Preparation Assistants
machine. Washes pots, pans, and trays by
hand. Scrapes food from dirty dishes and
Food Preparation Assistants prepare and washes them by hand or places them in
cook to order small variety of pre-cooked racks or on conveyor to dishwashing
food or beverages, clear tables, clean machine. Polishes silver, using burnishing-
kitchen areas and wash dishes. machine tumbler, chemical dip, buffing
wheel, and hand cloth. Transfers supplies
Occupations in this Group are classified and equipment between storage and
into the following Families: work areas by hand or by use of hand
pulled trolley. Sets up banquet tables.
9411 Fast Food Preparers Washes and peels vegetables, using knife
or peeling machine. Loads or unloads
9412 Kitchen Helpers
trucks picking up or delivering supplies
Family 9411
and food
Fast Food Preparers
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Fast Food Preparers prepare and cook to
Code 9412
order a limited range of foods or
Title Kitchen Helpers
beverages that involve simple preparation
processes and a small number of
Sub Division 95
ingredients. They may take orders from
Street and Related Sales and
customers and serve at counters or tables.
Services Workers
Family 9412
Street and Related Sales and Service
Kitchen Helpers
Workers provide and sell goods, excluding
food for immediate consumption, and
Kitchen Helpers clear tables, clean kitchen
provide a variety of services on streets
areas, wash dishes, preparing ingredients
and in other public places such as stations.
and perform other duties to assist
Tasks include: buying or making various
workers who prepare or serve food and
items for sale; loading and unloading
beverages.
items for sale and transporting them;
obtaining the materials necessary to
9412.0100
perform services; approaching people on
Kitchen Helper
the street to offer goods or services;
cleaning and polishing shoes; cleaning and
VOLUME II B 556
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
polishing car windows; running errands; Boot Polisher cleans and polishes shoes.
assisting drivers to find a parking place Brushes shoes to remove dust; applies
and ensuring car is not damaged during cleaning agents like soap or other
driver’s absence; handing out leaflets and chemical solution for removing dirt and
free newspapers; receiving immediate spots from soiled shoes using sponge or
payment. cloth; applies polish, colour or chalk-
powder (dry or mixed with liquid) with
finger, brush or soft cloth on leather,
Occupations in this Sub Division are canvas or other shoes; rubs surface of
classified into the following Groups: leather-shoes with soft brush to make
them shine; applies chalk or solution on
canvas or other non-leather shoes and
951 Street and Related Service
allows them to dry; finishes leather shoes
Workers
by further rubbing them with soft cloth or
952 Street Vendors (excluding Food)
flannel piece; finishes non-leather shoes
Group 951
by retouching with appropriate cleaning
Street and Related Service Workers
matter and by removing superfluous coat
and spots.
Street and related service workers provide
a variety of services on streets and in ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
other public places, including cleaning Code 9510
shoes, washing car windows, running Title Street and Related Service
errands, looking after property, and Workers
providing other on-the-spot street
services. 9510.0200
Bill Poster
Occupations in this Group are classified
into the following Families:
Billposter attaches advertising posters on
surfaces, such as walls and billboards,
9510 Street and Related Service using hand tools: Removes old poster,
Workers using scraping tool. Mixes paste-powder
with water to form paste. Smears paste
Family 9510 on wall or billboard surface, using brush.
Aligns poster sections on billboard and
Street and Related Service Workers
smoothens sections, using long-handled
brush. Staples or tacks posters on fences,
Street and Related Service Workers
walls, or poles. Climbs ladder to work
provide a variety of services on streets
from deck at bottom of elevated billboard.
and in other public places, including
May work from scaffolding.
cleaning shoes, washing car windows,
running errands, handing out leaflets,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
looking after property, and providing
Code 9510
other services on-the-spot.
Title Street and Related Service
Workers
9510.0100
Boot Polisher
VOLUME II B 557
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
9510.9900 Hawker; Peddler; Street Vendor;
Shoe Cleaning and Other Street Pheriwala sells articles of daily utility and
general merchandise such as vegetables,
Services Elementary Occupations,
sweets, cloth, utensils, toys, etc. on
Other
footpaths or by going from door to door.
Purchases goods from wholesale market
Shoe Cleaning and Other Street Services
according to his needs, and capital
Elementary Occupations, Other include
(money) available. Loads them in basket,
workers engaged in activities such as
or on pushcart, wheel-barrow or tricycle
cleaning shoe, washing car windows, or
and moves in selected areas to effect
running errands and providing various on
sales. Announces loudly regarding the
the spot street services, not elsewhere
goods or articles on sale and their prices
classified.
to attract customers. Attends to
customers and effects sale by measuring,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
weighing or counting, as necessary. May
Code 9510 also display goods or articles of sale on
Title Street and Related Service foot-path and effect sales. May purchase
Workers goods in lot, in auction or other sale. May
prepare and sell his own products and
Group 952 may operate means of conveyance. May
work on salary or commission basis or
Street Vendors (excluding Food) both.
Street vendors (excluding food) sell a ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
usually limited range of goods (excluding Code 9520
food for immediate consumption) in Title Street Vendors (excluding Food)
streets and public places such as stations,
cinemas or theatres. 9520.9900
Street Vendors, Non Food
Occupations in this Group are classified
Products, Other
into the following Families:
Street Vendors Non Food Products, Other
9520 Street Vendors (excluding Food)
include workers who sell various goods in
streets and public places such as stations,
cinemas or theatres not elsewhere
Family 9520
classified.
Street Vendors (excluding Food)
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Street vendors (excluding food) sell a Code 9520
usually limited range of goods (excluding Title Street Vendors (excluding Food)
food for immediate consumption) in
streets and public places such as stations, Sub Division 96
cinemas or theatres. Refuse Workers and Other
9520.0100
Elementary Workers
Hawker
VOLUME II B 558
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
Refuse workers and other elementary Garbage Collector (Motor Transport)
workers collect garbage from buildings, collects garbage or refuse by manual
yards, streets and other public places or scoop or mechanised scoop. Loads
keep streets and other public places or garbage on the truck and transports on
perform odd jobs for private households designated route within municipality area
or establishments. to dump yard. Dumps garbage/refuse
Tasks include-collecting, loading and manually or through dumper truck in the
unloading garbage; sweeping streets, dump yard. May ignite fire, spray
parks and other public places; chopping pesticides or chemical solutions on the
firewood; carrying water; beating dust out garbage to prevent bad odours.
of carpets and performing other odd-job
tasks. ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9611
Occupations in this Sub Division are Title Garbage and Recycling Collectors
classified into the following Groups:
9611.0201
961 Refuse Workers
E-Waste Collector
962 Other Elementary Workers
E-Waste Collector is responsible for
Group 961 collecting e-waste from retailers, repair
shops and other unorganized
Refuse Workers
stakeholders. Also responsible for
promoting the importance of e-waste
Refuse workers collect, process and
management and ill effects of improper
recycle garbage from buildings, yards,
handling of the e-waste and then
streets and other public places, or keep
collecting required information. The
streets and other public places clean.
responsibility also encompasses the
transportation of the collected e-waste to
Occupations in this Group are classified
the central warehouse by packaging the e-
into the following Families:
waste, labelling and maintaining the log
record.
9611 Garbage and Recycling Collectors
9612 Refuse Sorters Qualification Pack Details:
9613 Sweepers and Related Labourers QP NOS Reference TEL/Q2400
QP NOS Name E Waste Collector
NSQF Level 3
Family 9611
Garbage and Recycling Collectors
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9611
Garbage collectors collect and remove
Title Garbage and Recycling Collectors
rubbish and items for recycling from
buildings, yards, streets and other places.
9611.9900
Garbage Collectors, Other
9611.0100
Garbage Collector (Motor
Garbage Collectors, Other include workers
Transport)
who collect and remove garbage from
VOLUME II B 559
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
buildings, yards, streets and other public 9613.0400
places not elsewhere classified. Sweeper, Wet
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Sweeper, Wet; Scavenger cleans and
Code 9611 washes bathrooms, lavatories drains etc.
Title Garbage and Recycling Collectors and removes night-soil. Sweeps and
washes floor of bath-rooms, lavatories
and operation theatre rooms in hospitals
and removes garbage and other material
Family 9612 in closed buckets to the dustbin. Scrubs
floor with cloth, wet in phenyl and water.
Refuse Sorters Removes night soil using spade and
broom and carries it to dumping ground in
hand-cart.
Refuse Sorters identify, collect and sort
discarded items suitable for recycling at
dump sites and recycling enterprises or in ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
buildings, streets and other public places. Code 9613
Title Sweepers and Related Labourers
Family 9613
9613.0500
Sweepers and Related Labourers Sweeper, Sewer
Sweeper Sewer; Sewer Cleaner cleans
Sweepers and related labourers sweep
blocked underground drains and sewage
and clean streets, parks, airports, stations
and other public places.
system by various cleaning instruments.
Removes iron-cover from manhole and
descends in manhole with drainage
9613.0300
equipment. Collects debris and refuse in
Sweeper, Dry
bucket using spade and hands over bucket
to helper outside manhole. Uses bamboo
Sweeper, Dry cleans, sweeps and scrubs
or iron rod to clean sewer by pushing it in
buildings, streets, parks, etc. and removes
and out and repeats process till sewer is
garbage. Sweeps with broom or brush
cleaned. May remove debris and refuse in
floors of buildings, roads, parks, etc.
garbage carts to dumping ground. May
Removes dust and garbage in basket to
flush sewer with hose connected with
dustbin. Scrubs floor with cloth, wet in
underground hydrant.
phenyl and water to remove fine dust.
May clean carpets and rugs with brush
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and dust furniture and fixtures. May
Code 9613
prepare the broom. May dump garbage in
Title Sweepers and Related Labourers
cart and carry garbage in hand cart or in
animal driven cart to the dumping ground.
9613.9900
Sweepers and Related Labourers,
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Other
Code 9613
Title Sweepers and Related Labourers
VOLUME II B 560
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
Sweepers and Related Labourers, Other Caddie
include all other workers engaged in
sweeping, cleaning, and related work, not Caddie carries bags of golf equipment
elsewhere classified. around golf course, delivering clubs to
players as requested. Keeps different
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: types of golf clubs in leather bag; places
Code 9611 golf ball over the small mound (on which
Title Garbage and Recycling Collectors golf-ball is placed for first stroke by
player) and advises players, on request, in
Group 962 selection of proper club for particular
stroke and/or on peculiarities of course;
Other Elementary Workers follows golf-ball after hit along with player
and locates it, supplies required type of
golf club for further stroke; collects golf
Other Elementary Workers deliver and
clubs from player at close of play, cleans
carry messages and packages, collect
them and keeps kit in good condition.
money and stock vending machines, read
May inform player about type, condition
meters, collect water and firewood,
and location of hole; may assist golf-
collect and issue tickets for parking or
professional (marker) in up-keep of golf
events.
course.
Occupations in this Group are classified
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
into the following Families:
Code 9621
Title Messengers, Package Deliverers
9621 Messengers, Package Deliverers
and Luggage Porters
and Luggage Porters
9622 Odd-job Persons
9621.0400
9623 Meter Readers and Vending
Bellhop (Hotel and Restaurant)
Machine Collectors
9624 Water and Firewood Collectors
Bellhop (Hotel and Restaurants) performs
9629 Elementary Workers, Not
any combination of following duties to
Elsewhere Classified
serve hotel guests. Escorts incoming hotel
guests to rooms, assists with hand
Family 9621
luggage, and offers information pertaining
Messengers, Package Deliverers to available services and facilities of hotel,
and Luggage Porters points of interest, and entertainment
attractions. Inspects guest's room to
ensure furnishings are in order and
Messengers, Package Deliverers and
supplies are adequate. Explains features
Luggage Porters carry and deliver
of room, such as operation of radio,
messages, packages and other items
television, and night-lock, and how to
within an establishment or between
place telephone calls. Pages guests in
establishments, to households and
lobby, dining room, or other parts of
elsewhere, or carry luggage especially at
hotel. Delivers messages and runs
hotels, stations and airports.
errands. Delivers room service orders.
Picks up articles for laundry and valet
9621.0300
VOLUME II B 561
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
service. Calls taxi for guests. Transports letter boxes in his beat at fixed hours.
guests about premises or local areas in car Unlocks letter boxes and collects mail into
or motorized cart. Keeps record of calls mail bag. Removes plate indicating hour of
for service. Delivers packages, suitcases, clearance and replaces it with new plate
and trunks, and sets up sample rooms. indicating next clearance hour. Locks
letter box and ensures proper fixation of
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: hour plate and lock. Clears all letter boxes
Code 9621 and delivers bags containing mail to post
Title Messengers, Package Deliverers office. May sort incoming and outgoing
and Luggage Porters mail at the post office. May stamp letters
and covers, seal bags and load or unload
9621.0500 them in the mail van.
Porter, Baggage (Hotel and
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Restaurant)
Code 9621
Title Messengers, Package Deliverers
Porter, Baggage (Hotel and Restaurant)
and Luggage Porters
delivers luggage to and from hotel rooms,
sets up sample rooms for sales personnel
9621.0700
and performs related services as
Mail Carrier
requested by guest. Transfers trunks,
packages, and other baggage to room or
loading area, using hand pulled trolley. Mail Carrier transports mail bags in van or
Arranges for outgoing freight, express or cart to and from different post offices and
mail shipments, computes charges, tags railway station in his area. Collects mail
article, and records information, such as bags from head post office or railway
addressee, addressor, carrier, and station. Counts and acknowledges their
charges, on specified forms. Sets up receipt. Loads mail bags in proper order in
display tables, racks, or shelves and assists mail van or cart. Accompanies mail bags in
sales personnel in unpacking and van or cart for security, delivers them at
arranging merchandise display. May railway station or post office and obtains
supply guests with travel information, receipt of delivery. Collects outgoing and
such as transportation rates, routes, and local mail bags from post office, counts
schedules. them and acknowledges their receipt.
Delivers them at head post office against
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: receipt. May assist in stamping, sorting
and distributing letters. May carry mail
Code 9621
bags manually. May work as Letter Box
Title Messengers, Package Deliverers
Peon.
and Luggage Porters
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
9621.0600
Code 9621
(Letter Box Peon) Post Man
Title Messengers, Package Deliverers
and Luggage Porters
Letter Box Peon collects letters from letter
boxes installed within his areas at
9621.0800
scheduled hours and delivers them to post
Runner, Mail
office. Follows planned route to clear
VOLUME II B 562
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
Runner, Mail collects and delivers letters Hotel Concierge; Baggage Porter, Hotel
and other postal articles from and to delivers baggage to and from hotel rooms,
different village post offices and postal sets up sample room for Salesmen and
agencies. Collects mail bags from head performs related services as requested by
post office, counts them and guests or directed by authorities.
acknowledges their receipt. Carries and Transfers trunks, packages and other
delivers them to specified post offices or baggage to room or loading area manually
places and obtains delivery receipts. or using hand truck. Arranges for outgoing
Collects outgoing mail bags, counts and freight, express or mail shipment,
acknowledges their receipt and delivers compute charges, tags articles, and
them at the main post office against records information such as addressee,
acknowledgment. May work as Sorter and addresser, carrier and charges on
Mail Carrier. May carry with him spear- specified forms. (Sets up display tables,
head stick fitted with small bells to ward racks or shelves and assists Salesmen in
off wild animals. unpacking and arranging merchandise
display.) May supply guests with travel
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: information such as transportation rates,
Code 9621 routes, and schedules. May escort
Title Messengers, Package Deliverers incoming guests to rooms.
and Luggage Porters
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
9621.0900 Code 9621
Sorter, Mail Title Messengers, Package Deliverers
and Luggage Porters
Sorter, Mail sorts out incoming or
9621.1300
outgoing mail, such as letters, parcels,
registered articles, etc., for delivery to Water Carrier
addressees or despatch to appropriate
post offices. Collects mail to be sorted and Water Carrier; Bhishtidraws water from
reads addresses for sorting. Sorts mail, wells, rivers ponds etc. for drinking,
beat or area wise, according to addresses, washing, cleaning and other purposes in
in different bins or postal bags for house, building or institution. Collects
distribution to Postmen for local delivery water in big leather bags, buckets or other
or despatch to appropriate post offices containers from taps, ponds or well and
through Railway or Air Mail service. May carries leather bag or containers filled
work in post office or RAM’S. van and with water and delivers at houses of
ensure despatch of mail bags to the clients for drinking, cleaning of drains,
correct destination. storage in tanks. Supplies water to work
sites. May work whole-time or part-time
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: in private houses for supplying drinking
Code 9621 water.
Title Messengers, Package Deliverers
and Luggage Porters ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9621
9621.1200 Title Messengers, Package Deliverers
Hotel Concierge and Luggage Porters
VOLUME II B 563
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
9621.9900 changes shelf labels as required to
Messengers, Package Deliverers indicate selections. Makes change for
customers and answers questions
and Luggage Porters, Other
regarding selections. Adjusts temperature
gauges to maintain food items at specified
Messengers, Package Deliverers and
temperatures. Performs minor repairs or
Luggage Porters, Other include workers
adjustments on machines to correct jams
who carry and deliver messages, packages
or similar malfunctions, using hand tools.
and other items within an establishment
Prepares requisitions for food and drink
or between establishments, to households
supplies. Cleans interior and exterior of
and elsewhere, or carry luggage especially
machines, using damp cloth. Maintains
at hotels, stations and airports not
eating area in orderly condition. May sell
elsewhere classified.
precooked foods from hot table. May
remove money from vending machines
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and keep records of receipts.
Code 9621
Title Messengers, Package Deliverers ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
and Luggage Porters
Code 9623
Title Meter Readers and Vending
Family 9622
Machine Collectors
Odd-job Persons
9623.0200
Coin Collector
Odd job Persons clean, paint and maintain
buildings, grounds and facilities, and
Coin Collector drives vehicle over
undertake simple repairs.
established route to collect money from
and refill coin-operated amusement-game
Family 9623 machines and vending machines that
Meter Readers and Vending dispense merchandise, such as coffee,
food, beverages, candy and condoms.
Machine Collectors
Loads transport vehicle with supplies
according to instructions. Drives vehicle to
Meter Readers and Vending-Machine
establishment, collects coins, refills
Collectors stock vending machines and
machine, cleans inside of machines that
collect money from them or from parking
dispense food or beverages, and records
meters and other coin-boxes, or read
amount of money collected. Turns in
electricity, gas or water meters.
money to cashiering department at
completion of route and unloads truck.
9623.0100
Reports malfunctioning machines to
Vending Machine Attendant maintenance department for repair. May
perform minor repairs or adjustments on
Vending Machine Attendant stocks machines, using hand tools, to correct
machines and assists customers in facility malfunctions. May promote installation of
where food is dispensed from coin- new or additional coin-operated machines
operated machines. Places food or drink at locations of customers or potential
items on shelves of vending machines and customers.
VOLUME II B 564
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: QP NOS Reference PSC/Q0203
Code 9623 QP NOS Name Municipal Water
Title Meter Readers and Vending and Sewage
Machine Collectors Assessor
NSQF Level 3
9623.0300
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Meter Reader
Code 9623
Title Meter Readers and Vending
Meter Reader reads electric, gas or water
Machine Collectors
consumption meters and records volume
used by residential and commercial
9623.0401
consumers: Walks or drives truck over
established route and takes readings of PUC Attendant
meter dials. Inspects meters and
connections for defects, damage, and PUC Attendant needs to assist customers’
unauthorised connections. Indicates in checking the vehicles and
irregularities on forms for necessary understanding the compliance pertaining
action by servicing department. Verifies to PUC.
readings to locate abnormal consumption
and records reasons for fluctuations. Qualification Pack Details:
Turns service off for non-payment of QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9601
charges in vacant premises, or on for new QP NOS Name PUC Attendant
occupants. Collects bills in arrears. Level 2
Returns route book to commercial office NSQF Level 2
for billing purposes.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9623
Code 9623 Title Meter Readers and Vending
Title Meter Readers and Vending Machine Collectors
Machine Collectors
9623.0501
Tyre Inflation Attendant
9623.0301 Tyre Inflation Attendant needs to
Municipal Water and Sewage maintain the air check facility existing at
Assessor fuel stations. The individual needs to
check the air pressure in vehicles coming
into the fuel station using digital/manual
Municipal Water and Sewage Assessor is
air facility.
responsible for carrying out readings of
water meter installed in housing,
Qualification Pack Details:
commercial and institutional setups and
collection of water and waste water QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9603
samples for carrying out quality checks. QP NOS Name Tyre Inflation
Attendant
Qualification Pack Details: NSQF Level 2
VOLUME II B 565
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9623 Water and firewood collectors collect
Title Meter Readers and Vending water and firewood and transport them
Machine Collectors on foot or using hand or animal carts.
9623.0601 Family 9629
Quick Care Point Attendant
Elementary Workers, Not
Quick Care Point Attendant needs to assist Elsewhere Classified
customers in checking the vehicles and
understanding the compliance pertaining
This family covers Elementary Workers
to coolant, water and oil levels.
not classified elsewhere in Division 9,
Elementary workers. For instance, the
Qualification Pack Details:
group includes those who issue and
QP NOS Reference ASC/Q9602 collect parking or admission tickets,
QP NOS Name QCP Attendant provide personal items to patrons or
NSQF Level 2 customers in cloak.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details: 9629.0100
Code 9623
Usher
Title Meter Readers and Vending
Machine Collectors
Usher guides patrons to their seats in
cinema halls, theatres and other places of
entertainment. Examines uncollected
9623.9900
portions of tickets, held by patrons, at
Vending Machine Money entrance or inside auditorium or
Collectors, Meter Readers and enclosure of show, play, game or any
Related Workers, Other other entertainment to find out allotted
numbers of seats reserved; escorts
patrons to their appropriate seats; guides
Vending Machine Money Collectors,
patrons whose seats are not reserved to
Meter Readers and Related Workers,
available unreserved seats; distributes
Other include workers who stock vending
programme or other publicity material
machines and collect money from them or
and answers queries of patrons regarding
from parking meters and other coin-
location of bars, restaurants, public
boxes, or read electricity, gas or water
conveniences, telephone etc., assists
meters not elsewhere classified.
patrons in searching lost articles; delivers
left behind articles to manager for return
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
to owners; examines collected portions of
Code 9623
tickets at gate, arranges and renders
Title Meter Readers and Vending
account to manager; assists in displaying
Machine Collectors
publicity posters, hoardings, or notices in
or outside place of entertainment. May do
Family 9624
odd jobs for superiors e.g. getting hand-
bills printed, checking of tickets, etc.
Water and Firewood Collectors
VOLUME II B 566
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Divison 9
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9629
Title Elementary Workers Not
Elsewhere Classified
9629.9900
Door Keepers, Watchpersons and
Related Workers, Other
Door Keepers, Watchpersons and Related
Workers, Other include workers who
undertake door keeping duties in
apartment houses and other buildings,
attend parking places, watch houses and
other properties to prevent illegal entry or
theft and detect fire or other hazards,
collect tickets, or perform ushering duties
not elsewhere classified.
ISCO 08 Unit Group Details:
Code 9629
Title Elementary Workers Not
Elsewhere Classified
VOLUME II B 567
INDEX
Volume II B
Sr. No. Division Total Number of Job
Roles
1. 6 118
2. 7 849
3. 8 676
4. 9 115
Total 1758