NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION
OF OCCUPATIONS-2015
(Code Structure)
Vol-I
Government of India
Ministry of Labour & Employment
Directorate General of Employment
www.ncs.gov.in
NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION
OF OCCUPATIONS-2015
(Code Structure)
Vol-I
Government of India
Ministry of Labour & Employment
Directorate General of Employment
www.ncs.gov.in
FOREWORD
National Classification of Occupation (NCO) plays a very vital role in maintaining
standards of occupation in the country and is regularly used in the network of employment
exchanges that constitute the Public Employment Service for Classification of Occupations,
job postings and job search. This classification is used in all types of censuses and sample
surveys conducted in India especially in data collection, processing, analysis and presentation
of survey results besides its wide range of applications in policy formulation and policy
analysis. The Directorate General of Employment, Ministry of Labour & Employment,
Government of India is responsible for maintaining and updating the National Classification
of Occupation in India aligned with the corresponding International Standard Classification of
Occupations (ISCO) of ILO. The first classification was NC0-1946 followed by NC0-1958, NC0-
1968, NC0-2004 and now the current series NC0-2015. The National Classification of
Occupations-2015 (NC0-2015) is aligned with International Standard Classification of
Occupations-2008 (ISC0-2008).
2. NCO is a classification of occupations which describes and assigns codes to the various
occupations in the country and aligns it with the ISCO. These codes are reviewed and updated
periodically to reflect developments in the labour market, particularly with the emergence of
new occupations, as well as to align with changes in the international standard. These codes
also help in promoting international comparability of statistical data relating to occupations.
These occupational standards follow a scientific and hierarchical approach having major,
minor and unit groups of classification which has evolved over the years to capture the
structural changes in the employment market and current work practices and work
environment.
3. The NC0-2015 is a compendium for occupational information available in the Indian
economy. The document gives an insight into the occupational framework, nature of duties
involved and the level of skill requirement to perform the activities in a real time work
situation. The users of NCO may make use of the information for vocational guidance, career
counselling and various surveys and studies undertaken by user agencies. The NC0-2015 has
also been mapped with the National Industrial Classification (NIC) and Qualification Packs
National Occupational Standards (QP-NOS) to cater to the structural changes in the labour
market. Furthermore, NC0-2015 framework is dynamic enough to capture and reflect the
newly emerging occupations in the industry.
4. The current volume of NCO details out the job description of 3600 civilian occupations
covering 52 sectors, as compared to the earlier series of NCO i.e. NC0-2004, which contained
the job descriptions for 2945 occupations. The NC0-2015 has 8 digit coding structure which
was mapped and aligned to ISC0-2008 with the addition of 2 digits. There is one to one
correspondence between ISC0-2008 and the NC0-2015 with the first digit representing the
Division (Major GroupL second digit representing Sub-Division (Sub-Major GroupL third digit
representing the Group (Minor Group) and the fourth digit representing the Family (Unit
GroupL a decimal is introduced after the first four digits in order to create a distinction
between the Families and individual Occupations. The NC0-2015 is in two Volumes viz. Vol I
& II (A& B) where Vol I gives the abstract of Occupations along with their concordance to the
earlier NC0-2004. Vol II gives the detailed descriptions ofthe occupations.
I
i
5. The Ministry is implementing the National Career Service (NCS) Project as a Mission
Mode Project for modernising and transforming the network of employment exchanges and
Model Career Centres are being set up in collaboration with States. The NCS Portal is
operational at www.ncs.gov.in and aims to link job seekers with employment opportunities
along with rich career content. The NCO Codes are integrally enmeshed in the NCS initiative
and facilitates efficient job matching. The NCO Codes may be used by varied stakeholders in
making information in the employment market more transparent and objective. Soft copies
of the publication is available on the NCS portal.
6. The NC0-2015 series has been evolved along with career content to contribute to the
knowledge repository of career options. More details on the classification, as well as the
principles, scope and structure of the classification are available on the National Career
Service (www.ncs.gov.in) platform. This knowledge repository provides career related
information for use by career counsellors and job aspirants across the country and aims at
supporting policy makers, students, job seekers, persons returning to the labour force,
investors and employers in making better labour market decisions.
7. I am confident that the publication will prove useful in classifying occupations for
official work, survey and research work, international comparisons on the demand and supply
of workforce and many more such areas. I place on record my appreciation for all the
stakeholders who have contributed their valuable inputs in the publication. I also take this
opportunity to extend my thanks to the members of the Expert Group on the career content
who have examined and vetted the contents of this publication/documents. I also extend my
thanks to the officers of the Directorate lead by Mr. Pravin Srivastava, Deputy Director
General (Employment) for timely coordination with all the stakeholders involved in this
initiative.
--~~Lj-
(P.P. Mitra)
Principal Labour & Employment Advisor
and Director General Employment
II
ii
J3.J1=J ~ x~ \J1 ~ II "l +-t ?II C'1 q
wFcffi
J3.{1=J ~
~ 3i!lc0<'1, ~o~o~o ~ ~-110001
~urm\
'+fRtl 'fl i( ¢I i( ~ "ff#rq Tele : 91-11-23 71 02 65
MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT
Fax : 91-11-23 35 56 79
SHANKAR AGGARWAL, I.A.S. SHRAM SHAKTI BHAVAN
E-mail :secy-labour@nic.in
Secretary to Govt. of India NEW DELHI-110001
D.O. No. D,GE-11/01/2016-VG/01
Dated: 1 7 J 5 f :L_o I f,
Subject: Release of the National Classification of Occupation (NCO), 2015 series.
Dear Secretary,
The Directorate General of Employment (DGE) is responsible for revising and
maintaining the National Classification of Occupations (NCO) on the lines of International
Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) of the ILO. The codes are used for classification
of occupations by the employment exchanges and census/survey organisations of the
Central and State government. These codes are revised from time to time to capture the
changes in occupational patterns and structural changes in the economy. The codes also
help in promoting International comparability of statistical data relating to occupations. The
first set of occupation standards (ISCO) was brought out by the International Labour
Organisation (ILO) in 1958 and revised from time to time, the latest being the 2008 series.
The corresponding series in the Indian National Classification of Occupation (NCO) were
1958, 1967 and 2004. These occupational standards follow a scientific and hierarchical
approach having major, minor and unit groups of classification which has evolved over the
years to capture the structural changes in the employment market. The NCO codes are
extensively used by the employment exchanges and other data/survey collection agencies
like the Ministry of Statistics & PI (NSSO, CSO), Census Commissioner & RGI, NITI Aayog,
IAMR, State Governments, Academic Institutions etc.
2. The current national series (NC0-2004) was based on the ISC0-1988 series and
required updation to capture information on the new occupations that have emerged,
especially on account of liberalisation and globalisation. In the meanwhile, the Ministry
began implementing the National Career Service as a Mission Mode Project for modernising
and transforming the network of employment exchanges and 100 Model Career Centres are
being set up in collaboration with States. The NCS Portal is operational at www.ncs.gov.in
and aims to link job seekers with employment opportunities along with rich career content.
III
iii
The NCO Codes are integrally enmeshed in the NCS initiative and facilitates efficient job
matching. The NCO - 2015 code is in 2 volumes, the first giving the abstract occupations
along with their concordance to the earlier NC0-2004 series and the second volume giving
the detailed occupational description. A hard copy of the first volume is enclosed for ready
reference. It is requested that the NCO Codes may be used by all stakeholders in making
information in the employment market more transparent and objective. Soft copies of these
publications are available on the attached CD and also on the NCS portal.
3. I request that information about the publication be circulated to the various
Departments and other users and its usage may be ensured by sending various statistical
returns using these revised codes. We look forward to suggestions for improvement in the
NCO codes and these may kindly be sent at feedback.dget@nic.in.
With regards
End: As above.
Yourssi~
-*~
(Shankar Aggarwal)
To,
All Secretary, GOI Ministries and Departments
(As per list attached)
IV
iv
~ ~) \J14 11 '( n;i=?lrr.lC "':TTT<Q
~~~
-;:ffl ~-11 0001
~ 3BtCll<1, 3l"nfo~o~o
Tele : 91-11-23 71 02 65
~ '<"l'<ctll'< cf; ~
MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT Fax : 91-11-23 35 56 79
SHANKAR AGGARWAL, I.A.S. SHRAM SHAKTI BHAVAN
E-mail :secy-labour@nic.in
Secretary to Govt. of India NEW DELHI-110001
D.O. No. DGE-11/01/2016-VG/01
Dated: t l / .>/ ;;ur.r-£
Subject: Release of the National Classification of Occupation (NCO), 2015 series.
Dear Chief Secretary,
The Directorate General of Employment (DGE) is responsible for revising and
maintaining the National Classification of Occupations (NCO) on the lines of International
Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) of the ILO. The codes are used for classification
of occupations by the employment exchanges and census/survey organisations of the
Central and State government. These codes are revised from time to time to capture the
changes in occupational patterns and structural changes in the economy. The codes also
help in promoting International comparability of statistical data relating to occupations. The
first set of occupation standards (ISCO) was brought out by the International Labour
Organisation (ILO) in 1958 and revised from time to time, the latest being the 2008 series.
The corresponding series in the Indian National Classification of Occupation (NCO) were
1958, 1967 and 2004. These occupational standards follow a scientific and hierarchical
approach having major, minor and unit groups of classification which has evolved over the
years to capture the structural changes in the employment market. The NCO codes are
extensively used by the employment exchanges and other data/survey collection agencies
like the Ministry of Statistics & PI (NSSO, CSO), Census Commissioner & RGI, NITI Aayog,
IAMR, State Governments, Academic Institutions etc.
2. The current national series (NC0-2004) was based on the ISC0-1988 series and
required updation to capture information on the new occupations that have emerged,
especially on account of liberalisation and globalisation. In the meanwhile, the Ministry
began implementing the National Career Service as a Mission Mode Project for modernising
and transforming the network of employment exchanges and 100 Model Career Centres are
being set up in collaboration with States. The NCS Portal is operational at www.ncs.gov.in
and aims to link job seekers with employment opportunities along with rich career content.
V
v
The NCO Codes are integrally enmeshed in the NCS initiative and facilitates efficient job
matching. The NCO - 2015 code is in 2 volumes, the first giving the abstract occupations
along with their concordance to the earlier NC0-2004 series and the second volume giving
the detailed occupational description. A hard copy of the first volume is enclosed for ready
reference. It is requested that the NCO Codes may be used by all stakeholders in making
information in the employment market more transparent and objective. Soft copies of these
publications are available on the attached CD and also on the NCS portal.
3. I request that information about the publication be circulated to the various
Departments and other users and its usage may be ensured by sending various statistical
returns using these revised codes. We look forward to suggestions for improvement in the
NCO codes and these may kindly be sent at feedback.dget@nic.in.
With regards
End: As above.
Yourssi~
~~
(Shankar Aggarwal)
To,
All Secretary, GOI Ministries and Departments
{As per list attached)
VI
vi
Table of Contents
1 Introduction to Classification of 1 - 32
Occupations
2 Concordance Table 33 - 238
3 Alphabetical Index 239 - 371
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
INTRODUCTION TO CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATIONS
Classification group organizes information meaningfully and systematically into a standard
format that is useful for determining the similarity of ideas, events, objects or persons. The
preparation of a classification group means the creation of an exhaustive and structured set of
mutually exclusive and well-described categories often presented as a hierarchy that is reflected
by the numeric or alphabetical codes assigned to them.
Classification of occupation is used in the national context for the collection and dissemination of
statistics from sources such as population censuses, labour market surveys, employer surveys,
and other sources. It is also used by the Government and other organizations in activities such as
administration of worker’s compensation, matching jobseekers with job vacancies, and
management of employment-related migration.
The classification of occupation is a categorization of individual occupations on the kind of work
and skill-level involved in that particular occupation. It is intended that all the job titles in the
nation can be assigned to one (and only one) of these categories or codes.
1. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
NCO 2015
NCO 2004
NCO 1968
NCO 1958
NCO 1946
1946 1958 1968 1988 2004 2008 2015
ISCO 1958
ISCO 1968
ISCO 1988 ISCO 2008
VOLUME I 1
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
NATIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF OCCUPATION IN INDIA: 1946 TO 2015
1.1 National Classification of Occupations (NCO) 1946
The first effort in the direction of preparing an occupational classification system in India was
made by the then Directorate General of Resettlement and Employment, DGRE (later called the
Directorate General of Employment and Training (DGE&T) and now referred to as Directorate
General of Training (DGT) ) in 1946 in bringing out a publication titled “Guide to Occupational
Classification” primarily to be used by employment service for day-to-day work at the
Employment Exchanges such as registration of applicants, documentation of vacancies,
compilation of statistical data, etc. It was an industrial-based classification and was framed after
the British pattern.
1.2 National Classification of Occupations (NCO) 1958
International Labour Organization (ILO) brought out the first International Standard Classification
of Occupations (ISCO) in 1958 with a view to bring out a complete occupational classification
system, which could help in promoting international comparability of statistical data relating to
occupations.
DGE&T accordingly took up the work of preparing an NCO on the lines of ISCO and brought out
“National Classifications of Occupations – 1958”.
NCO – 1958 contained detailed information about 1990 occupations in the following hierarchical
pattern:
11 Occupational Divisions (one digit code number)
75 Occupational Groups (two digit code number)
331 Occupational Families (three digit code number)
1990 Occupations (five digit code number)
VOLUME I 2
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
1.3 National Classification of Occupations (NCO) 1968
Both the ILO and the DGE&T continued to work for the improvement of their respective
classification systems. The ILO introduced a number of changes in the ISCO – 58 viz. called it ISCO
– 66, applied the principle of ‘type of work performed’ more rigidly, and revised the Major,
Minor, and Unit Groups (corresponding to NCO Divisions, Groups, and Families) of the
classification. In order to ensure that NCO – 68 is compatible with ISCO – 66, DGE&T revised the
code structure so that the new NCO, called NCO – 68, would be patterned after the ISCO – 66.
While adopting the ISCO – 66 code structure, deviations were made, wherever necessary, to suit
the Indian conditions and settings.
This edition attempted to group together occupations according to similarity of work performed
and contained information about 2484 occupations on the following hierarchical pattern:
8 Occupational Divisions (one digit code number)
95 Occupational Groups (two digit code number)
462 Occupational Families (three digit code number)
2484 Occupations (five digit code number)
This was a 5 digit classification system, which gave a unique title to every occupation (called the
Standard Title) and in some cases alternative titles have also been given. This classification gave
definitions of the occupations, a brief outline of the main tasks, and functions of each occupation
thus bringing out the difference between one occupation and another.
In this classification system, the grouping of occupations was based on the fundamental criteria
of ‘type of work performed’. Accordingly, occupations were classified in the NCO – 68 so that all
the workers engaged in the same type of work are grouped together irrespective of the industrial
classification of establishments where they are engaged. For example, all clerical workers have
been classified in one occupational group whether they are engaged in a factory, mine,
VOLUME I 3
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
government office or even a shop. Similarly, drivers have been grouped together, and so are
those engaged in services.
The branch of economic activity (industry), in which a job occurs, did not affect the classification
of occupations in the NCO – 68.
However, this classification system did not take into account the skill involved in the performance
of various occupations. This means, in effect, that occupations having similar nature of work,
though requiring varied levels of skill for their performance, were grouped together.
1.4 National Classification of Occupations (NCO) 2004
After a gap of about 3 decades the NCO – 04 was brought out. During this period, the economic,
social, industrial, and agrarian fields underwent drastic changes. Globalization and economic
liberalization had infused competitiveness amongst various industries. This led to changes in the
work process and skill level of the workers. This also brought in a totally new class of jobs and
functions.
The International Labour Organization (ILO) revised ISCO – 66 on the recommendation of the
International Conference of Labour Statisticians and brought out ISCO – 88. It was developed to
facilitate international comparisons of occupational statistics and to serve as a model for
countries developing or revising their national occupational classifications. The ILO came out with
a new version wherein not only the work performed, but also the skill level required was
considered in the codification of occupations.
ISCO – 88 had three main aims namely:
i. To facilitate international communication about occupations by supplying national
statisticians with a tool to make national occupational data available internationally
VOLUME I 4
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
ii. To make it possible for international occupational data to be produced in a form that can
be useful for research as well as for specific decision-making and action-oriented
activities. These activities could connect with international migration or job placement.
iii. To serve as a model for countries developing or revising their national occupational
classifications. However, ISCO – 88 was not intended to replace any existing national
classification of occupations as the occupational classification systems of different
countries was required to reflect the structure of their individual national labour markets.
The framework necessary for designing and constructing ISCO – 88 was created in such a way
that it not only defined the kind of work performed, but also the skill required to perform that
particular job effectively.
A “job” has been defined as a set of tasks and duties performed by one person and an
“occupation” as a set of jobs whose tasks and duties are of a similar nature.
“Skill” has been defined as the ability to carry out the tasks and duties of a given job, which
encompasses two dimensions namely:
i. Skill Level: A function that describes the range of the tasks and duties involved
ii. Skill Specialization: Shows the field of knowledge required, the tools and machinery used,
the materials worked on, and the kinds of goods and services produced
In view of the international character of the classification, only four, broad skill levels were used.
This classification of skill levels was more or less based on the educational categories and levels,
which appear in the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED). It is also worth
keeping in view that the focus was on the skills required to carry out the tasks and duties of an
occupation and not on whether a worker working in a particular occupation is more or less skilled
than another worker in the same occupation.
VOLUME I 5
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
Skill Skill Definition Educational
Level Requirements
I Typically involves the performance of simple and routine Primary
physical or manual tasks Education
II Typically involves the performance of tasks such as operating a Secondary
machinery and electronic equipment, driving vehicles, Education
maintenance and repair of electrical and mechanical
equipment, and manipulation, ordering, and storage
information
III Typically involves performance of complex technical and First University
practical tasks that require an extensive body of factual, Degree
technical, and procedural knowledge in a specialized field
IV Typically involves the performance of tasks that require Post-Graduate
complex problem-solving, decision-making, and creativity University
based on an extensive body of theoretical and factual Degree
knowledge in a specialized field
The ISCO – 88 had the following hierarchical structure:
1. Major Groups: 10
2. Sub-Major Groups: 28
3. Minor Groups: 116
4. Unit Groups: 390
The ten Major Groups in ISCO – 88 are:
1. Legislators, Senior Officials, and Managers
2. Professionals
3. Technicians & Associate Professionals
4. Clerks
5. Service Workers and Shop and Market Sales Workers
6. Skilled Agricultural and Fishery Workers
7. Craft and Related Trades Workers
8. Plant and Machinery Operators and Assemblers
VOLUME I 6
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
9. Elementary Occupations
10. Armed Forces
Significantly, the concept of skill level has not been applied in the case of legislators, senior
officials, and managers based on information from national sources. Skills for executing task and
duties of these occupations vary to such an extent that it is not feasible to link them with any of
the four, broad ISCO – 88 skill levels.
1.4.1 Revision of NCO 1968 to NCO 2004
The exercise on Revision of NCO – 1968 was undertaken by DGE&T through State Directorates of
Employment and Vocational Rehabilitation Centres for Handicapped under the aegis of the
DGE&T.
A core group comprising technical committee called the Steering Committee was formed having
members drawn from the various organizations like government bodies, ministries, universities,
and research institutes.
The Steering Committee recommended that a Core Group maybe formed to constantly guide and
advise the DGE&T study team in their work. Accordingly, a Core Group was set-up having
members drawn from the following organizations:
1. Directorate General of Employment & Training (DGE&T)
2. Central Statistical Organization
3. National Sample Survey Organization
4. Registrar General of India
5. Department of Small Scale Industries
6. State Director of Employment, NCT, Delhi
7. State Director of Employment, Andhra Pradesh
A job analysis schedule was designed for collection of occupational information from various
sources. The schedule was designed on the basis of occupational and educational information
VOLUME I 7
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
available through the reports on Occupational Educational Pattern of Employees published under
the Employment Market Information (EMI) programme of the DGE&T and other relevant sources.
The job analysis schedule was designed to cover all aspects of an occupation. For the convenience
of the job analysts, and to maintain uniformity, detailed guidelines for filling the job analysis
schedules and highlighting the steps involved for collecting data for each item were specified in
the schedule. Most of the officers who were put on the job of collection of occupational
information on the job analysis schedules were drawn from EMI Units and VRCs where collection
of occupational information forms are a regular feature of their jobs.
The job analysis schedule was pre-tested in six states namely Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, and Gujarat through the six Vocational Rehabilitation Centres for
Handicapped (VRCs) functioning in these states. The data collected by the VRCs was analysed and
the details about the same occupations coming from different VRCs were cross-checked. The
schedule was then finalized and approved by the Core Group for adoption in the field.
Employment Exchanges and Vocational Rehabilitation Centres collect labour market information
so as to know about newly emerging areas and those going out of existence so that the
jobseekers can be guided for gainful activities such as self-employment, etc.
1.4.2 NCO 2004 Methodology
Since the primary source of collecting information is the “establishment”, it was necessary to
ensure the widest coverage of the establishments. To achieve this wide coverage, following
knowledge/information repositories were considered:
i. Employers’ register maintained by the National Employment Service for their Employment
Market Information Programme
ii. Lists of employers organizations
iii. List of establishments compiled by NSSO for conducting Annual Survey of Industries, etc.
The final framework was prepared by the Employment Market Information Units, which is as
follows:
VOLUME I 8
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
The Employment Market Information Units were asked to update their employers’ registers by
utilizing the data available from various sources like:
1. List of establishments compiled by NSSO for conducting annual survey of industries
2. Consultation with websites hoisted by corporate sector
3. Consultation with private placement agencies to the extent possible
4. Utilization of records maintained by various offices of state governments such as the ones
maintained by:
 The office of Inspector of Shops & Establishments
 The office of Chief Inspector of Factories
 The office of Inspector of Schools
 The office of Local Mines Inspector
 The office of District Industries Officer
 The office of District Treasury Officer
 Records from the Small Industries Service Institute
 Employers’ Associations, etc.
1.4.3 Coverage of Unorganized Sector
Unorganised sector was also covered by the VRCs during the course of job development work,
particularly under the community-based rehabilitation programme in which the main thrust was
on identifying occupations in the non-formal sector.
1.4.4 Collection Through Secondary Sources
In addition to information collected by the job analysts through sample survey, efforts were
made to collect data through various secondary sources like all the national and major regional
newspapers, leading magazines, and the Internet.
Occupational classification systems of other countries were also consulted to locate newly
emerging occupations which have a relevance to the Indian conditions. Apart from this, other
VOLUME I 9
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
organizations like RGI, CSO, NSSO, etc. also provided very useful inputs that served valuable for
deciding on new occupations.
1.4.5 Co-Ordination and Liaising
Since a large number of officers belonging to various agencies were involved in the whole
exercise, co-ordination and liaising between various agencies was achieved firstly through
distribution of the detailed Manual of Procedure on Revision of NCO to each and every officer
involved in the process. Secondly, constant touch through correspondence, telephone, fax, and e-
mail, etc. was maintained by the DGE&T study team with all those involved in the exercise. The
field analysts were encouraged to get even the slightest doubts cleared.
1.4.6 Processing of the Job Analysis Schedules
A large volume of data thus collected became available at DGE&T Headquarters, which was
classified according to NIC codes. The job descriptions of the same occupation received from
different sources were edited and consolidated to have an average picture of the job duties of
the occupation. These average pictures were then compared with the job descriptions of the
existing occupations to identify new occupations. Duplication was taken care out to ensure
inclusion of only new occupations.
1.4.7 Skill Level
Before codifying all the occupations on the pattern of ISCO – 88, the skill levels as defined in the
ISCED were modified to suit the Indian conditions taking particular cognizance of informal skill. In
the Indian context, the skills necessary to perform the tasks and duties of a given job can be
acquired not only through formal education but also through informal training and experience.
The four skill levels thus defined for NCO – 04 vis-à-vis the skill levels defined in ISCO – 88 are as
given below:
Skill Level ISCO – 88 Educational NCO – 2004 Educational Requirements
Requirements
I Primary Education Up to 10 years of formal education and/or informal
VOLUME I 10
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
skills
II Secondary Education 11-13 years of formal education
III First University Degree 14-15 years of formal education
IV Post-Graduate University More than 15 years of formal education
Degree
The skill level of each newly identified occupation was decided on the basis of information about
academic and technical qualifications and experience requirement as also the average job
description of the occupation to see whether the job requirement was of administrative,
managerial, and supervisory nature or of a subordinate/repetitive nature in the Indian context.
In keeping with the skill levels defined above to suit the Indian conditions, following divisions
were classified in tune with the defined skill levels to accommodate occupations:
NCO 2004 Title Skill Level
Divisions
1 Legislators, Senior Officials, and Managers Not Defined*
2 Professionals IV
3 Associate Professionals III
4 Clerks II
5 Service Workers and Shop & Market Sales Workers II
6 Skilled Agricultural and Fishery Workers II
7 Craft and Related Trades Workers II
8 Plant and Machine Operators and Assemblers II
9 Elementary Occupations I
X Workers not Classified by Occupations -
VOLUME I 11
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
* The concept of skill level was not applied in the case of legislators, senior officials, and managers
as skills for executing task and duties of these occupations varied to such an extent that it was not
be feasible to link them with any of the four, broad skill levels.
1.4.8 Levels of Aggregation
In keeping with the pattern of classification of occupations adopted in ISCO – 88, it was decided
to have one more level of aggregation between Division and Group called Sub-Division. The
nomenclature for different levels of aggregation is as under:
NCO – 68 ISCO – 88 NCO – 2004
DIVISION MAJOR GROUP DIVISION
GROUP SUB-MAJOR GROUP SUB-DIVISION
FAMILY MINOR GROUP GROUP
- - - UNIT GROUP FAMILY
OCCUPATION - - - - - -
- - - - - - OCCUPATION
1.4.9 Finalization and Codification
The focus in NCO – 2004 was on the skills required to carry out the tasks and duties of an
occupation and not on whether the worker holding a particular occupation was more skilled than
another worker in the same occupation. In case of multi-skill occupations, the coding was done
on the basis of the predominant skill required to perform the tasks in a job role.
All the 2945 Occupations (both existing and newly identified) were grouped together according to
combinations of specific duties, tasks, and work functions. They were grouped in such a way that
the job roles performed were the same or closely related. Each occupation was assigned a six
digit code, a distinct title (in some cases alternative titles have also been provided), and a
definition.
VOLUME I 12
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
NCO 2004 Code Structure Number of Units Six Digits Code Number Denoted by
Division 10 Initial single digit code number
Sub-Division 30 First two digits of code number
Group 116 First three digits of code number
Family 439 First four digits of code number
Occupations 2945 Last two decimal digits of the code
number
The occupations have been first assigned to the ten Occupational Divisions (identified by the
initial digit in the code number) on the basis of their job description. The first code indicates the
Division in which the job falls under. The first and second code indicates the Sub-Division under
which the job role falls. The first three digits make up the Group of the job role, and the first four
digits together make the Family under which the job role is categorized. The last two digits
indicate the unique code for that particular job role. Disaggregation after Family have been made
to accommodate initially up to nine ‘two digit’ codes within each Family keeping a provision for
accommodating up to 99 Occupations in each Family.
In a Family, the relation between occupations was determined by the similarity of characteristics
of work done and the level of skill. The most important feature of a Family was that the
Occupations included were closely related to each other than to Occupations outside the Family.
The last two digits of the code numbers for the individual Occupations within a Family were
numbered in sequence, usually leaving intervals of 5 or 10 between numbers depending on the
number of Occupations to be accommodated within the Family. This also left a scope for
accommodating any new Occupations that maybe identified later without disturbing the basic
code structure. Shorter intervals between the code numbers of two consecutive Occupations
VOLUME I 13
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
were kept to denote the close proximity of the nature of work of the two Occupations whereas
larger intervals would denote dissimilarity of the nature of work of the two Occupations. A period
(.) separates the final two digits from the code number of the Family.
The revision of NCO – 2004 was carried out in line with the approach adopted by ILO in its ISCO –
88. As such, all the Unit Groups in ISCO – 88 were adopted as Families at 4 digit level, even
though in some cases no Occupations at the specified skill level were identified so far. This was
done to accommodate Occupations, which may become available in the near future.
Owing to introduction of the concept of skill level and new aggregation at six digit level in the
NCO – 2004 classification, the code structure was radically changed. This resulted into breaking
up and/or merger of some Divisions, Groups, and Families of the 1968 version. Due to this, exact
equivalents of all the codes in the 68 version may not be available.
As in the earlier editions, separate codes were not provided for apprentices, foremen, and
instructors (in-plant). These maybe classified by prefixing ‘A’, ‘B’ or ‘C’ respectively before the
code number of the occupation which is being learned, supervised or instructed.
VOLUME I 14
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
2. National Classification of Occupations – 2015
Globalization of the labour market has increased the demand for internationally comparable
occupational data for both statistical and administrative purposes. In India, there is a huge gap
between jobseekers and job providers, training institutions, and related industries. In the last ten
years, there has been a sea of change in almost all the sectors as most jobs have become
mechanized or computerized. These changes need to reflect in the NCO as well. Therefore, the
first step to achieve the vision of connecting youth with job opportunities was to create a fresh
new repository of occupations.
In 2015, Training wing of DGE&T has become a part of the Ministry of Skills Development and
Entrepreneurship whereas the Employment wing is responsible for NCO – 2015.
The main objectives of updating the NCO are:
 To create a useful model for the development of National Classifications of Occupations
(NCO)
 To make NCO – 2015 compatible to ISCO – 2008 so that it is relevant for international
reporting, comparisons, and exchange of statistical and administrative information about
occupations
2.1 Need for Revision
Currently, the employability and vocational skills upgradation sectors in India are undergoing a
paradigm shift. The dynamics and outlook towards labour is increasingly becoming market-
responsive and driven by constantly evolving needs. Simultaneously, the employment
aspirational quotient and needs of individuals who seek employment have already evolved and
are closely aligned with global trends and factors. Aligning to these factors and requirements, the
DGE&T has envisioned a multidimensional approach for evolution.
DGE&T envisaged aligning and upgrading NCO – 2004 using the guided baseline provided by ISCO
– 2008. The need for this revision was to get accurate data from the market along with research
into sectors/industries and to identify the size and profile of the sectors/industries, types of
occupations, key trends, developments, and opportunities for progression.
VOLUME I 15
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
Today’s ease of connectivity with the world and access to technology has made information
available to one and all. It is important therefore that all those who seek employment be
connected to those who provide it, and sustain them in employment. To address this element,
DGE&T created a central portal that will cross-connect the employee to the employer. This portal,
after revision of the NCO, will have relevant and comparative information that will assist
potential jobseekers to understand, evaluate, and decide on a suitable career entry.
2.2 Mapping the QP NOS to the Job Roles in NCO – 2015
In India, general education and vocational education training have been operating as separate
verticals with little interaction between the two. In order to facilitate mobility from vocational to
general education, and vice-versa, a national qualification framework was developed.
The National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) was brought out by National Skill
Development Agency. NSQF is based on an outcome-based approach and each level in the NSQF
is defined and described in terms of competency levels that need to be achieved. The job roles
corresponding to each of these competency levels would be ascertained with the involvement of
the industry through the Sector Skill Councils (SSCs).
The use of NSQF will make it easier for the institutes, students, and employers to pursue a
particular course and address the issues of inequity and disparity in qualifications. As a
competency-based and outcome-based qualification framework, NSQF will facilitate Recognition
of Prior Learning (RPL). NSQF will also help to align Indian qualifications to international
qualifications.
The National Occupational Standards (NOS) is one of the most important contributions of the
National Skills Development Corporation (NSDC) to the skills environment of India. This was done
in affiliation with the Sector Skill Councils (SSCs). The SSCs are the national partnership
organization with NSDC that bring together all the stakeholders – industry, labour, and the
academia.
VOLUME I 16
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
NOS defines the measurable performance outcomes required from an individual engaged in a
particular task. NOS lists down what an individual should know and do while performing a
particular task.
The SSCs play a pivotal role in linking the gap between what the industry wants and what should
be the curriculum for a skilling programme. One of the functions of the SSC is developing skill
competency standards and qualifications, which form the National Occupational Standards (NOS).
Essentially NOS are benchmarks of good practice. The set of NOS for a job role is called a QP or
Qualification Packs. The Government has clearly stated that the SSCs will provide their sector-
specific competency frameworks or Qualification Packs, which help in both the creation of
curriculum and assessments.
As the NCO is a comprehensive repository for national occupations, all the QPs released by the
various sector/industries through NSDC are mapped to the job roles in the NCO – 2015. A QP NOS
in the NCO – 2015 is aligned to a job role wherever an exact match is found. A new job role was
added to the NCO where there was no description of a job role specified as per a given QP NOS.
Thus, all the QPs released by the various SSCs are mapped and added during the creation of NCO
– 2015. The NCO – 2015 would be updated as and when new QPs are released by the SSCs. The
Employment wing of DGE&T will undertake any alignment of QP NOS to NCO –2015 in the future.
2.3 Outline of the Revision Exercise
A five step approach was followed to update the existing NCO – 2004. The exercise was to align
the job roles in NCO – 2004 to ISCO – 2008 and also map the job roles to various sectors and
industries along with the existing NIC – 2008. The NCO job roles were also classified into jobs that
were relevant, needed any modification or were completely obsolete. The Qualification Packs
(QP) released by National Skills Development Corporation (NSDC) were also mapped to the NCO –
2015 job roles.
VOLUME I 17
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
The five steps approach is:
1. Aligning existing NCO – 2004 to ISCO – 2008 to create NCO – 2015
2. Mapping the QPs to the job roles in NCO – 2015
3. Coding the NCO – 2015 job roles
4. Mapping the job roles to the sectors/industry
5. Mapping the job roles to NIC – 2008
6. Classifying the job roles as relevant, relevant with modification, and obsolete
2.4 Aligning NCO – 2015 to ISCO – 2008
While aligning NCO – 2004 to ISCO – 2008, it was noticed that a number of completely new Sub-
Major Groups, Minor Groups, and Unit Groups have been introduced to ISCO – 2008. This led to a
total revamp of Groups and Families in NCO – 2015. Many existing Families were either split or
merged into different Families.
The changes thus made showed that NCO – 2004 was out of date in some areas as a result of the
impact of development in technology as many jobs now depended on the use of computers and
telecommunications. Thus, the merger or spilt of Families reflected occupational and
technological change in the current labour market.
During the mapping exercise, the nature of work performed has been given more emphasis than
the formal education in determining the skill level of the occupation.
Skill Level ISCO – 08 Educational Requirements NCO – 2015 Educational Requirements
I Primary Education Up to 10 years of formal education and/or
informal skills
II Secondary Education 11-13 years of formal education
III First University Degree 14-15 years of formal education
IV Post-Graduate University Degree More than 15 years of formal education
VOLUME I 18
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
The skill level of each newly identified Occupation was decided on the basis of information about
academic and technical qualifications and experience requirement as also the average job
description of the occupation to see whether the job requirement was of administrative,
managerial, supervisory nature or of a subordinate/repetitive nature in the Indian context.
In keeping with the skill levels defined above to suit Indian conditions, following Divisions were
classified in tune with the defined skill levels to accommodate Occupations:
NCO 2015 Title Skill Level
Divisions
1 Legislators, Senior Officials, and Managers Not Defined*
2 Professionals IV
3 Associate Professionals III
4 Clerks II
5 Service Workers and Shop & Market Sales Workers II
6 Skilled Agricultural and Fishery Workers II
7 Craft and Related Trades Workers II
8 Plant and Machine Operators and Assemblers II
9 Elementary Occupations I
The following changes occurred in NCO – 15 after it was aligned/mapped to ISCO – 2008:
 Updating job roles linked to the information and technology sector
 Expansion of job roles in the health sector
 Reorganization of job roles for clerks. This was again reorganized to reflect the rapid
growth of information and technology
VOLUME I 19
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
 Reorganization of job roles that fall under the categories of sales and service workers,
personal service workers , personal care workers, and protective services workers
 New Families were added to suit the national requirements
 Detailed categorization of job roles in information and services sector like tourism
 Division X – Workers not classified by Occupations were removed from NCO – 2015
classification
3. International Classification of Occupations
NCO – 2004 followed a six digit coding structure with a decimal after the first four digits. The first
four are single digit representation of Division, Sub-Division, Group, and Family respectively. The
last two digits of the code, after the decimal, denote the individual Occupation. NCO – 2004 was
based on ISCO – 1988 and it is almost a decade since it was updated. Meanwhile, ILO has also
published a revised version of ISCO in 2008. Many changes have taken place in the economic,
social, industrial, and agrarian fields and have resulted in creation of new jobs and functions in
the Indian labour market during this period.
In order to understand and incorporate the best practices across the world, five international
Occupational Classifications were studied along with NCO – 2004 as specified below:
1. International Labour Organization – International Standard Classification of Occupations
(ISCO)
2. United States of America – Standard Occupation Classification (SCO)
3. Australia & New Zealand – Australian and New Zealand Standard Classification of
Occupations (ANZCO)
4. Germany – Klassifikation der Berufe (KlDB)
5. Canada – National Occupational Classification
VOLUME I 20
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
3.1 International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO)
International Labour Organization (ILO) has developed ISCO for the classification of occupations
from an international perspective. The latest published version is ISCO – 2008. This classification
system contains the following categories:
10 Major Groups
43 Sub-Major Groups
130 Minor Groups
436 Unit Groups
ISCO – 2008 has a four digit coding structure with a single digit representation for Major Groups,
Sub-Major Groups, Minor Groups, and Unit Groups.
Sample Code Sample Code Title
8153 Sewing Machine Operators
3.2 United States of America – Standard Occupation Classification
In United States of America, the latest version of Occupational Classification available is the
Standard Occupation Classification 2010 (SOC – 2010). This classification system contains
following categories:
23 Major Groups
97 Sub-Major Groups
461 Broad Occupations
840 Detailed Occupations
VOLUME I 21
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
SOC – 2010 has a six digit coding structure with a representation for Major (2 digits), Minor,
Broad Occupation (2 digits), and Detailed Occupations.
Sample Code Sample Code Title
51-6031 Sewing Machine Operator
3.3 Australia and New Zealand – ANZCO
Australia and New Zealand Standard Classification of Occupations Version 1.2 (1220.0 ANZCO) is
the latest occupational classification available in Australia & New Zealand. This classification
system contains the following categories:
8 Major Groups
43 Sub-Major Groups
97 Minor Groups
358 Unit Groups
1024 Occupations
ANZCO has a six digit coding structure with representation for Major, Sub-Major, Minor, and Unit
Groups and Occupations (2 digits).
Sample Code Sample Code Title
711611 Sewing Machinist
3.4 Germany – Klassifikation der Berufe
In Germany, the latest Occupation Classification available is Klassifikation der Berufe 2010 (KldB
2010). This classification system contains the following categories:
VOLUME I 22
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
10 Occupational Areas
37 Occupational Main Groups
144 Occupational Groups
700 Occupational Sub-Groups
1286 Occupational Types
KldB 2010 has a five digit coding structure with a single digit representation for Occupational
Areas, Occupational Main Groups, Occupational Groups, Occupational Sub-Groups, and
Occupational Types. The first four digits represent the kind of Occupation and the last digit
represents the skill level.
Sample Code Sample Code Title
28222 Occupations in the clothing, hat and cap manufacturing— technically-
oriented activities
3.5 Canada – National Occupational Classification
In Canada, the latest version of the Occupation Classification available is National Occupational
Classification 2011 (NOC – 2011). This classification system contains the following categories:
10 Broad Occupations
40 Major Groups
140 Minor Groups
400 Unit Groups
VOLUME I 23
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
NOC – 2011 has a four digit coding structure with a single digit representation for Broad
Occupations, Major, Minor, and Unit Groups. This coding structure is quite similar to the ISCO
Coding Structure.
Sample Code Sample Code Title
9446 Industrial Sewing Machine Operators
VOLUME I 24
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
4. NCO – 2015 Coding Structure
There have been numerous changes in the international sphere, which have been captured in the
ISCO – 2008 and other international standards. It was necessary to review the coding structure of
NCO to accommodate the changing labour market environment in the country as well as globally.
This was done with the help of the National Competency Framework (NSQF), which is an
outcome-based approach and functions through the qualifications pack – QP NOS. Based on the
analysis of the abovementioned international classifications and the factors impacting skill and
labour environment in India, an enhanced framework for the NCO was created. This framework
incorporates the following:
 Type of occupation
 Skill level needed for the occupation
 Linkage to the QP NOS and NSQF levels
To accommodate the linkage to QP NOS, an 8 digit coding structure was suggested. An expert
committee was established to review and accept the suggested 8 digit coding structure for NCO –
2015. This coding structure was based on the NCO – 2004 coding structure mapped and aligned
to ISCO – 2008 with the addition of 2 digits, which will represent the QP NOS.
The coding structure of NCO – 2015 is as follows:
Coding Structure NCO – 2015 Digits Representation Corresponding Mapping to
ISCO – 2008
The first digit Division Major Group
The first two digits Sub-Division Sub-Major Group
The first three digits Group Minor Group
The first four digits Family Unit Group
The first two digits after the decimal Occupation
VOLUME I 25
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
The last two digits after the decimal QP NOS
 The first digit of NCO – 2015 will represent the Division (Major Group in ISCO)
 The first two digits of NCO – 2015 will represent the Sub-Division (Sub-Major Group in ISCO)
 The first three digits of NCO – 2015 will represent the Group (Minor Group in ISCO)
 The first four digits of NCO – 2015 will represent the Family (Unit Group in ISCO)
 A decimal is introduced after the first four digits in order to create a distinction between the
Families and individual Occupations.
 The first two digits after the decimal of NCO – 2015 will represent the different occupations
that can be combined under the given Family
 The last two digits after the decimal in NCO – 2015 shall represent the availability of a QP
NOS for the job role.
 The value of the last two digits would depend on two scenarios:
i. If QP NOS is available, then the value of the last 2 digits after the decimal will be
between1-99 (arranged sequentially)
ii. If QP NOS is unavailable, then the value of the last two digits after the decimal will remain
00
4.1 NCO 2015 – Illustration of the Code
An illustrative example of the proposed NCO – 2015 code is shown below for the code –
8153.0111 (Sewing Machine Operator, General):
Code: 8153.0111
Job Title: Sewing Machine Operator, General
8 Division In this example, ‘8’ stands for the Division which is
Plant and Machine Operators and Assemblers
81 Sub-Division 81 stands for the Sub-Division of the Occupation,
which is Stationary Plant and Machine Operators
815 Group 815 represents the Group under which the occupation
VOLUME I 26
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
falls, which is Textiles, Fur and Leather Products
Machine Operators
8153 Family 8153 denotes the Family under which the occupation
is listed, which is Sewing Machine Operators
8153.01 Occupation .011 indicates the Occupation under the given Family,
which is Sewing Machine Operator, General
8153.0111 Occupation 1 (the last digit in .0111) denotes the QP NOS
reference i.e. Sewing Machine Operator published by
QP NOS Reference
Apparel, Made-ups & Home Furnishing
Sample Code
The NCO – 2015 Coding Structure can accommodate 9999 Families. There can be a maximum of
99 Occupations under each Family. There can be a maximum of 99 QP NOS references per
Occupation.
Considering the dynamics of the labour market and addition of new QP NOS by the SSCs over a
period of time, the NCO – 2015 codes would be reviewed and updated periodically. This eight
digit coding structure provides ample scope for addition of Families or Occupations to the NCO, if
required, in the future.
4.2 Mapping the Job Roles to the Sectors/Industry
Once the job roles/occupations were mapped as per ISCO – 2008, they were also classified as per
the sector/industry in which they fit. This mapping will help the Career Counsellors to guide a
jobseeker in gaining the correct job as per the relevant sector. Thus, all the job roles in the newly
created NCO – 2015 were mapped to the relevant sectors. The data generated was then shared
with experts from the industries for validation.
4.2.1 Mapping the Job Roles to NIC
VOLUME I 27
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
Job roles in the NCO – 2015 are also mapped to the National Industrial Classification 2008 (NIC),
which is an essential statistical standard for developing and maintaining comparable database
according to economic activities.
NIC classifies the economic activities under three broad categories viz. primary production
(agriculture and mining), secondary production (manufacturing and construction), and services
(transport, commerce, administration, etc.)
The NIC – 2008 seeks to provide a basis for the standardized collection, analysis, and
dissemination of industry- (economic activity) wise economic data for India. Apart from being the
standard industrial classification, NIC is widely used by the government agencies, industry
associations, and researchers for various administrative, analytical, and research purposes. Thus
linking or mapping the NCO – 2015 would encompass not only the broad-based economic
activities, but also all the job roles that would be a part of these activities.
NIC – 2008 coding is based on economic activities under various sectors/industries. The activities
are broadly classified under various sectors/industries. This classification does not accommodate
every job role in a sector. Currently NIC – 2008 has 21 sections (A to U) corresponding to the
various sectors. All the NCO – 2015 Occupations have been classified as per sectors and mapped
to NIC – 2008. There are certain occupations that may feature in more than one sector. For
example, the occupation of Storyboard Artist (NCO – 2015 Code: 2166.0209), which has QP NOS
Reference of Media & Entertainment SSC - MES/Q0507, has employment prospect in multiple
economic activities such as activities of individual writers for all subjects including fictional
writing, technical writing, etc. (NIC 2008 Code: 90004), Publishing of computer games for all
platforms (NIC 2008 Code: 58203), and Video Production (NIC 2008 Code: 59112).
4.3 Classifying the Job Roles
NCO – 2015 defines and describes various occupations available in the country giving them
standard and alternative occupational titles. As per DG&ET, a job analysis of all job codes was
VOLUME I 28
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
essential. The task involved analysis of all job codes in terms of relevance and completeness, and
categorizing them in three groups namely:
 Relevant (R)
 Relevant with Modification (RM)
 Redundant/Obsolete (O)
It is observed that with time, some job codes have become irrelevant. The reason is that either
the job profiles do not exist due to changing requirements of the industry or they may require
certain modifications. A thorough study of all job codes was undertaken and each job code was
categorised as relevant, relevant with modification, and redundant/obsolete. The break-up of
each category is explained below:
R – All the previous codes that are relevant according to the current work practices and
environment to be marked as R (Relevant)
RM – All the previous codes that are relevant according to the current work practices and
environment, but with certain modification (like modification in job description,
modification/changes in the title, changes/modifications in skill level) to be marked as RM
(Relevant with Modification)
O – All the previous codes that are no longer relevant to the current work practices and
environment to be marked as O (Redundant/Obsolete).
Industry experts were consulted to review the NCO – 2015 job roles and validate the
categorization of NCO codes as R, RM, and O. The industry experts also validated the cases
wherein new codes have been proposed.
5. National Career Service Project (NCSP)
5.1 The National Career Service Project (NCSP)
VOLUME I 29
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
The aim of the Government is to ensure that the aspiring youth of India pursue the right career
choice. Keeping this in mind the main objective of the DGE&T is career counselling. Career
counselling will not only help the youth to choose the right job for them, but will also help with
better skills for enhancing growth and development. Taking this forward, DGE&T and
Government have taken-up the task of establishing a knowledge repository within the National
Career Service Project (NCSP). This knowledge repository shall act as a common, centralized
platform to provide career-related information to career counsellors and aspirants across the
country. This repository will not only store data, but will also link jobs with the appropriate
industrial sectors. Occupations listed and mapped under NCO – 2015 will act as the beginning
point of creating career content, which will then form a part of the knowledge repository of the
National Career Service (NCS) Portal.
The aim of the NCSP is:
 To provide gainful employment to all jobseekers registered with Employment Exchanges
 To facilitate interaction between jobseekers and employers
 To disseminate accurate and consistent employment market information to all
stakeholders on time
The NCSP, therefore, is a comprehensive and multipronged transformational project with the
following key aspects:
5.1.1 Model Career Centres (MCC)
The aim is to transform the current Employment Exchange Offices into Career Counselling
Centres. These career centres would serve as a one-stop-shop for all career related needs of the
youth and students seeking counselling and employment. These career centres shall undertake all
the activities related to NCSP i.e. establishing inter-linkages with industry for managing the
demand side while on the other hand providing counselling and job assistance services to the
supply side.
VOLUME I 30
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
5.1.2 Developing a Network of Professional Career Counsellors
NCSP plans to establish a network of career counsellors. This will be done by transforming the
existing Employment Exchange Offices into Career Counselling Centres and also identifying other
institutions/agencies that can volunteer in the career counselling activities. The training of the
career counsellors will be undertaken by the Training wing of DGE&T.
5.1.3 National Career Service Portal Implementation
The National Career Service Portal will act as a platform to bridge the gap between the
government and private job providing ecosystem, jobseeker, and skill development ecosystem.
5.1.4 Maintenance of Knowledge Repository of Career Counselling Content
For Employment Exchange Officers to work effectively as Career Counsellors, they need to have
access to an updated knowledge repository of various career options and employment
opportunities. This content should be renewed on quarterly basis based on the feedback
provided by various stakeholders.
VOLUME I 31
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Introduction
5.1.5 Inform, Educate, Communicate (IEC) Activities
NCSP will work with a variety of partners like NGOs, schools, colleges, jobseekers, skill
institutions, employers, volunteer agencies, technology partners, verification agencies, etc. For
this, a programme will be developed that will Inform, Educate, Communicate (IEC) to reach out to
these partners.
VOLUME I 32
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
CONCORDANCE TABLE
OF
NCO 2015
With Occupational Titles and Equivalent NCO 2004 Codes
VOLUME I 33
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Division 1 Managers
Sub- 11 Chief Executives, Senior Officials and Legislators
Division
Group 111 Legislators and Senior Officials
Family 1111 Legislators
1111.0100 Elected Official, Union Government 1111.10
1111.0200 Elected Official, State Government 1112.10
1111.0300 Elected Official, Local Bodies 1113.10
1111.9900 Legislators, Other 1119.90
Family 1112 Senior Government Officials
1112.0100 Administrative Official, Union Government 1121.10
1112.0200 Diplomat 1121.20
1112.0300 Executive Officials, Union Government 1121.30
1112.0400 Administrative Official, State Government 1122.10
1112.0500 Executive Official, State Government 1122.20
1112.0600 Administrative and Executive Officials, Quasi 1123.10
Government (Central)
1112.0700 Administrative & Executive Officials, Quasi 1123.20
Government (State)
1112.0800 Administrative and Executive Officials, Local 1124.10
Bodies
1112.9900 Senior Government Officials, Other 1129.90
Family 1113 Traditional Chiefs and Heads of Villages
VOLUME I 34
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 1114 Senior Officials of Special Interest Organizations
1114.0100 Political Worker 1141.10
1114.0200 Senior Officials of Employers, Workers and Other 1142.00
Economic Interest Organizations
1114.0300 Director, Disaster Management Services 1143.10
1114.9900 Senior Officials of Special Interest Organizations, 1143.90
Other
Group 112 Managing Directors and Chief Executives
Family 1120 Managing Directors and Chief Executives
1120.0100 Working Proprietor, Electricity 1211.10
1120.0200 Working Proprietor, Gas 1211.20
1120.0300 Working Proprietor, Water Supply 1211.30
1120.0400 Director, Electricity 1211.40
1120.0500 Director, Gas 1211.50
1120.0600 Director, Water Supply 1211.60
1120.0700 Director, Bank 1212.10
1120.0800 Director, Insurance 1212.20
1120.0900 Working Proprietor, Mines/Proprietor, Mines 1213.10
1120.1000 Working Proprietor, Quarry/Proprietor, Quarry 1213.20
1120.1100 Working Proprietor, Well Drilling/Proprietor, 1213.30
Well Drilling
1120.1200 Working Proprietor, Construction/Proprietor, 1213.40
Construction
VOLUME I 35
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
1120.1300 Director, Construction 1213.50
1120.1400 Director, Mines 1213.60
1120.1500 Director, Quarry 1213.70
1120.1600 Director, Well Drilling 1213.80
1120.1700 Working Proprietor, Manufacturing/Proprietor, 1214.10
Manufacturing
1120.1800 Director Manufacturing 1214.20
1120.1900 Working Proprietor, Wholesale Trade/Proprietor, 1214.30
Wholesale Trade
1120.2000 Working Proprietor, Retail Trade/Proprietor, 1214.40
Retail Trade
1120.2100 Director, Wholesale Trade 1214.50
1120.2200 Director, Retail Trade 1214.60
1120.2300 Working Proprietor, Transport 1215.10
1120.2400 Director, Transport 1215.20
1120.2500 Director, Communication 1215.30
1120.2600 Director, Airport 1215.40
1120.2700 Working Proprietor, Storage and Warehousing 1216.10
1120.2800 Director, Storage and Warehousing 1216.20
1120.2900 Working Proprietor, Lodging and Catering 1217.10
Services
1120.3000 Director, Lodging and Catering Services/Director 1217.20
Food and Beverage Service
1120.3100 Executive Chef 1217.30
VOLUME I 36
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
1120.3200 Working Proprietor, Recreation and 1218.10
Entertainment
1120.3300 Director, Recreation and Entertainment 1218.20
1120.3400 Station Director, Radio/TV 1218.30
1120.3401 Account Director ( Advertising Agency)
1120.3402 Sales Director (Media Org)
1120.3500 Working Proprietor, Other Services 1219.10
1120.3600 Director, Other Services 1219.20
1120.3700 Director, Museum/Zoo 1219.30
1120.3800 Chief Librarian 1219.40
1120.3900 Principal, College 1219.50
1120.9900 Managing Directors and Chief Executives, Others 1211.90
Sub- 12 Administrative and Commercial Managers
Division
Group 121 Business Services and Administration Managers
Family 1211 Finance Managers
1211.0100 General Manager, Bank 1307.10
1211.0200 General Manager, Insurance 1307.20
1211.0300 Purser, Ship 1231.10
1211.9900 Finance Managers, Others 1231.9
Family 1212 Human Resource Managers
1212.0100 Personnel Manager 1232.10
1212.9900 Personnel and Industrial Relations Managers, 1232.90
VOLUME I 37
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Other
Family 1213 Policy and Planning Managers
1213.0100 Manager, Automotive Service 1239.10
1213.0101 Quality Assurance Standards In-Charge
1213.0102 Manager – Customer Quality
1213.0200 Manager, Automotive Service Station 1239.20
1213.0201 Area Service Manager
1213.0202 Territory Service Manager
1213.9900 Managers, Other Services 1239.90
Family 1219 Business Services and Administration Managers
Not Elsewhere Classified
1219.0100 Manager, Import and Export 1227.30
1219.0101 Export Manager
1219.0200 Manager, Health Club/Manager, Fitness 1228.10
Club/Centre/Gym
Group 122 Sales, Marketing and Development Managers
Family 1221 Sales and Marketing Managers
1221.0100 Sales Manager (Wholesale Trade) 1233.10
1221.0200 Sales Manager (Retail Trade) 1233.20
1221.0301 Home Delivery Manager
1221.0401 Territory Sales Manager (Broadband)
1221.0501 Territory Sales Manager (Prepaid)
1221.0601 Sales Co-Ordinator (Media Org)
VOLUME I 38
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
1221.0602 Sales Manager (Media Org)
1221.9900 Sales and Marketing Managers, Other 1233.90
Family 1222 Advertising and Public Relation Managers
1222.0100 Manager, Advertising and Promotion 1234.10
1222.0102 Advertising Operations Co-Ordinator (Digital)
1222.0200 Manager, Fashion/Fashion Manager 1234.20
1222.9900 Advertising and Public Relations Department 1234.90
Managers, Others
Family 1223 Research and Development Managers
1223.0101 Manager Testing Facility
1223.0102 Manager Material Testing
1223.0201 Research Associate
Sub- 13 Production and Specialized Services Managers
Division
Group 131 Production Managers in Agriculture, Forestry
and Fisheries
Family 1311 Agricultural and Forestry Production Managers
1311.0100 General Manager, Plantation 1301.20
1311.0200 General Manager, Horticulture 1301.30
1311.0300 General Manager, Agricultural Farm 1301.10
1311.0400 General Manager, Livestock Farm 1301.40
1311.0500 General Manager, Dairy Farm 1301.50
1311.0600 General Manager, Poultry 1301.60
VOLUME I 39
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
1311.0700 Manager, Agricultural Farm 1221.10
1311.0800 Manager, Plantation 1221.20
1311.0900 Manager, Nursery 1221.22
1311.0901 Rubber Nursery Manager
1311.1000 Manager, Aerial Planting and Cultivation 1221.24
1311.1100 Manager, Orchard 1221.26
1311.1200 Manager, Horticulture Farm 1221.30
1311.1300 Manager, Livestock Farm 1221.40
1311.1400 Manager, Dairy Farm 1221.50
1311.1500 Manager, Poultry Farm 1221.60
1311.9900 Agricultural and Forestry Production Managers, 1221.90
Others
Family 1312 Aquaculture and Fisheries Production Managers
Group 132 Manufacturing, Mining, Construction and
Distribution Managers
Family 1321 Manufacturing Managers
1321.0100 Manager, Electricity 1222.40
1321.0200 Terminal Manager 1222.45
1321.0300 Manager, Gas 1222.50
1321.0400 Manager, Water Supply 1222.60
1321.0500 Manager, Food Processing Plant 1222.65
1321.0600 Manager, Manufacturing 1222.70
1321.0700 General Manager, Electricity 1302.40
VOLUME I 40
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
1321.0800 General Manager, Gas 1302.50
1321.0900 General Manager, Water Supply 1302.60
1321.1000 General Manager, Manufacturing 1302.70
1321.9900 Manufacturing Managers, Other 1302.90
Family 1322 Mining Managers
1322.0100 Manager, Mine 1222.10
1322.0200 Manager, Quarry 1222.20
1322.0300 Manager, Well Drilling 1222.30
1322.0400 General Manager, Mine 1302.10
1322.0500 General Manager, Quarry 1302.20
1322.0600 General Manager, Well Drilling 1302.30
1322.9900 Mining Managers, Other 1222.90
Family 1323 Construction Managers
1323.0100 Manager, Construction/Manager Construction 1223.10
Projects
1323.0200 Manager, Land Survey 1223.20
1323.0300 General Manager, Construction/General 1303.10
Manager Construction Projects
1323.9900 Construction Managers, Other 1303.90
Family 1324 Supply, Distribution and Related Managers
1324.0100 Manager, Material Control/Manager Materials 1235.10
1324.0101 Manager Supplier Quality
1324.0102 Material Co-Ordination Manager
VOLUME I 41
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
1324.0103 Manager Vendor Development
1324.0200 Manager, Transport 1226.10
1324.0300 Station Master, Roadways 1226.15
1324.0400 Traffic Inspector, Motor Transport 1226.17
1324.0500 Manager, Traffic 1226.20
1324.0600 Traffic Inspector, Railway 1226.25
1324.0700 Traffic Inspector, Tram 1226.29
1324.0800 Manager, Flight Operation 1226.30
1324.0900 Aerodrome Officer 1226.35
1324.1000 Flight Operation Officer, Air Service 1226.37
1324.1100 Traffic Officer, Air Service/Traffic Controller 1226.39
1324.1200 Manager, Storage and Warehousing 1226.50
1324.1201 Warehouse Supervisor
1324.1300 Goods Supervisor, Railway 1226.52
1324.1400 Goods Supervisor, Road Transport 1226.54
1324.1500 Station Master, Railway 1226.60
1324.1600 Platform Inspector, Railway 1226.62
1324.1700 Rates Inspector, Railway 1226.64
1324.1800 Depot Starter, Tram 1226.65
1324.1900 Section Controller, Railway 1226.67
1324.2000 Accident Officer, Tram 1226.69
1324.2100 General Manager, Transport 1306.10
VOLUME I 42
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
1324.2200 General Manager, Storage and Warehousing 1306.30
1324.9900 Supply, Distribution and Related Managers and 1226.90
General Managers, Other
Group 133 Information and Communications Technology
Services Manager
Family 1330 Information and Communication Technology
Services
1330.0100 Manager, Communication 1226.40
1330.0101 Communication Analyst
1330.0200 Contract Officer, Telephone/Liaising Officer/ 1226.70
PRO/Business Executive
1330.0300 Post Master 1226.80
1330.0600 General Manager, Communication 1306.20
1330.0701 Cluster Manager
1330.9900 Information and Communication Technology
Services Manager, Other
Group 134 Professional Services Managers
Family 1341 Child Care Service Managers
Family 1342 Health Services Managers
Family 1343 Aged Care Services Managers
Family 1344 Social Welfare Managers
Family 1345 Education Managers
1345.0100 Headmaster 1229.20
Family 1346 Financial and Insurance Service Branch
VOLUME I 43
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Managers
1346.0100 Manager, Bank 1227.10
1346.0200 Manager, Insurance 1227.20
1346.9900 Financial and Insurance Service Branch 1227.90
Managers, Other
Family 1349 Professional Services Managers Not Elsewhere
Classified
Sub- 14 Hospitality, Retail and Other Services Managers
Division
Group 141 Hotel and Restaurant Managers
Family 1411 Hotel Managers
1411.0100 Manager, Lodging and Catering 1225.10
Services/Resident Manager
1411.0200 General Manager, Lodging and Catering Services 1305.10
1411.9900 Hotel Managers, Others 1225.90
Family 1412 Restaurant Managers
1412.0100 Manager, Fast Food Service 1225.20
1412.9900 Restaurant Managers, Other 1305.90
Group 142 Retail and Wholesale Trade Managers
Family 1420 Retail and Wholesale Trade Managers
1420.0100 Manager, Wholesale Trade 1224.10
1420.0200 Manager, Retail Trade 1224.20
1420.0300 Manager, Export 1224.30
1420.0400 General Manager, Wholesale Trade/Senior 1304.10
VOLUME I 44
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Manager, Wholesale Trade
1420.0500 General Manager, Retail Trade, Senior Manager, 1304.20
Retail Trade
1420.9900 Retail and Wholesale Trade Managers, Other 1304.90
Group 143 Other Services Managers
Family 1431 Sports, Recreation and Cultural Centre
Managers
1431.0100 General Manager, Recreation and Entertainment 1309.10
1431.9900 Sports, Recreation and Cultural Centre Manager, 1309.90
Other
Family 1439 Services Manager Not Elsewhere Classified
Division 2 Professionals
Sub- 21 Science and Engineering Professionals
Division
Group 211 Physical and Earth Science Professionals
Family 2111 Physicists and Astronomers
2111.0100 Physicist, General 2111.10
2111.0200 Physicist, Mechanics 2111.15
2111.0300 Physicist, Heat 2111.20
2111.0400 Physicist, Light 2111.25
2111.0500 Physicist, Sound 2111.30
2111.0600 Physicist, Electricity and Magnetism 2111.35
2111.0700 Physicist, Electronics 2111.40
2111.0800 Physicist, Nuclear 2111.50
VOLUME I 45
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2111.0900 Astronomer 2111.60
2111.1000 Metrologist 2119.10
2111.1100 Material Scientist 2119.20
2111.9900 Physicists and Astronomers, Other 2111.90
Family 2112 Meteorologists
2112.0100 Meteorologist 2112.10
2112.9900 Meteorologists, Other 2112.90
Family 2113 Chemists
2113.0100 Chemist, General 2113.10
2113.0200 Chemist, Organic 2113.20
2113.0300 Chemist, Inorganic 2113.30
2113.0400 Chemist, Physical 2113.40
2113.0500 Chemist, Analytical 2113.50
2113.0600 Chemist, Industrial 2113.60
2113.0601 Quality Control Chemist
2113.0621 Lab Chemist – Finished Product Testing
2113.0622 Lab Chemist – Incoming Raw Material Testing
2113.0623 Lab Chemist – Compound Testing – Batch
Release
2113.0624 Lab Chemist – Cured Compound Testing
2113.0800 Chemist, Forensic Science 2113.80
2113.0901 Quality Assurance Chemist
VOLUME I 46
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2113.9900 Chemists, Other 2113.90
Family 2114 Geologists and Geophysicists
2114.0100 Geologist 2114.10
2114.0200 Petrologists 2114.20
2114.0300 Palaeontologist 2114.30
2114.0400 Geophysicist 2114.40
2114.0500 Hydrologist 2114.50
2114.0600 Mineralogist 2114.60
2114.0700 Seismologist 2114.70
2114.0800 Oceanographer 2114.80
2114.1500 Geologist, Petroleum 2114.15
2114.5500 Hydrographer, Waterworks 2114.55
2114.9900 Geologists and Geophysicists, Other 2114.90
Group 212 Mathematicians, Actuaries and Statisticians
Family 2120 Mathematicians, Actuaries and Statisticians
2120.0100 Mathematician 2121.10
2120.0200 Actuary 2121.20
2120.0300 Statistician 2122.10
2120.0400 Statistician, Applied 2122.20
2120.0500 Operation Research Analyst 2122.30
2120.0501 Associate – Analytics
2120.9900 Mathematicians, Actuaries and Statisticians, 2122.90
VOLUME I 47
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Other
Group 213 Life Sciences Professionals
Family 2131 Biologists, Botanists, Zoologists and Related
Professionals
2131.0100 Biologist, General 2211.10
2131.0200 Marine Biologist 2211.15
2131.0300 Cytologist 2211.20
2131.0400 Botanist, General 2211.35
2131.0500 Economic Botanist 2211.37
2131.0600 Plant Breeder 2211.40
2131.0700 Mycologist 2211.50
2131.0800 Algologist 2211.55
2131.0900 Zoologist, General 2211.60
2131.1000 Entomologist 2211.65
2131.1100 Parasitologist 2211.70
2131.1200 Bacteriologist 2211.85
2131.1300 Chemist, Biological 2212.10
2131.1400 Chemist, Food 2212.20
2131.1500 Plant Pathologist 2212.70
2131.1800 Plant Physiologist 2212.80
2131.9900 Biologists, Botanists, Zoologists and Related 2211.90
Professionals, Other
Family 2132 Farming, Forestry and Fisheries Advisors
VOLUME I 48
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2132.0100 Agronomist 2213.10
2132.0200 Horticulturist 2213.20
2132.0300 Soil Scientist 2213.30
2132.0400 Soil Conservationist 2213.40
2132.0500 Silviculturist 2213.50
2132.0600 Wood Anatomist 2213.60
2132.0700 Dairy Scientist 2213.70
2132.0800 Poultry Scientist 2213.80
2132.0900 Pisciculturist 2211.80
2132.1000 Farm Overseer, Crop Production 3213.10
2132.9900 Agronomists and Related Professionals, Other 2213.90
Family 2133 Environmental Protection Professionals
2133.0100 Ecologist 2211.25
2133.0200 Environment Scientist (Including Health) 2211.27
2133.0300 Taxonomist 2211.30
2133.0400 Paleobotanist 2211.45
Group 214 Engineering Professionals (Excluding
Electrotechnology)
Family 2141 Industrial and Production Engineers
2141.0100 Works Inspector, Engineering/Inspection 2149.10
Engineer
2141.0200 Instrument Engineer/Instrumentation Engineer 2149.15
2141.0300 Industrial Engineer 2149.76
VOLUME I 49
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2141.0301 Industrial Engineer Executive
2141.0400 Packaging Engineer 2149.77
2141.0500 Planning Engineer 2149.78
2141.0501 Production Planning & Control Engineer
2141.0600 Methods Engineer 2149.80
2141.0800 Engineering Estimator/Estimation Engineer 2149.84
2141.0900 Agricultural Engineer 2149.18
2141.1000 Textile Technologist 2149.20
2141.1100 Nuclear Engineer 2149.23
2141.1200 Jute Technologist 2149.25
2141.1300 Fibre Technologist 2149.30
2141.1400 Spinning Master 2149.35
2141.1500 Weaving Master 2149.40
2141.1600 Dyeing and Bleaching Master (Textiles) 2149.45
2141.1700 Printing Master (Textile) 2149.50
2141.1800 Sugar Technologist 2149.55
2141.1900 Dairy Technologist 2149.57
2141.2000 Wood Technologist 2149.60
2141.2100 Leather Technologist 2149.65
2141.2200 Glass Technologist 2149.70
2141.2300 Ceramic Technologist 2149.72
2141.2400 Printing Technologist 2149.74
VOLUME I 50
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2141.2500 Safety Engineer 2149.85
2141.2600 Occupational Health and Safety Specialist 2149.86
Family 2142 Civil Engineers
2142.0100 Civil Engineer, General 2142.10
2142.0200 Civil Engineer, Building 2142.20
2142.0300 Civil Engineer, Structural 2142.30
2142.0301 Plumbing Site Engineer
2142.0400 Civil Engineer, Irrigation 2142.40
2142.0500 Hydraulic Engineer 2142.45
2142.0501 Fire Protection Systems Design Engineer
2142.0600 Civil Engineer, Highways and Roads 2142.50
2142.0700 Civil Engineer, Railways 2142.60
2142.0800 Airport Engineer 2142.65
2142.0900 Civil Engineer, Public Health 2142.70
2142.0901 Public Health System Design Engineer
2142.1000 Engineer, Waterworks 2142.72
2142.1001 Groundwater Engineer
2142.1002 Wastewater Systems Design
2142.9900 Civil Engineers, Other 2142.90
Family 2143 Environmental Engineers
2143.0100 Solar Energy System Designer 2149.05
2143.0200 Bio-Medical Engineer 2149.17
VOLUME I 51
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2143.0300 Radiation Protection Engineer 2149.22
2143.0400 Waste Management Engineer, Radioactive 2149.87
Material
2143.0500 Pollution Control Engineer 2149.88
Family 2144 Mechanical Engineers
2144.0100 Mechanical Engineer, General 2145.10
2144.0101 Process Design Engineer
2144.0102 Process Try-Out Engineer
2144.0103 Process Try-Out Technician
2144.0104 Process Validation Executive
2144.0105 Manager, Process Engineering
2144.0106 Manager – Product Lifecycle Management
2144.0200 Designer, Machine 2145.15
2144.0201 Designer - Mechanical
2144.0300 Tool Engineer 2145.20
2144.0301 Equipment Designer
2144.0401 Mechanical Engineer, Production 2145.25
2144.0402 Product Conceptualization Engineer
2144.0403 Production Engineer
2144.0500 Mechanical Engineer, Structural 2145.30
2144.0600 Mechanical Engineer, Maintenance 2145.35
2144.0601 Service Engineer – Breakdown Service
VOLUME I 52
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2144.0700 Mechanical Engineer, Automobile 2145.40
2144.0701 Prototyping Engineer
2144.0800 Automobile Designer 2145.42
2144.0801 Product Design Manager
2144.0802 Modeller
2144.0803 Product Design Engineer
2144.0804 Prototyping Manager
2144.0900 Mechanical Engineer, Aeronautical 2145.45
2144.1000 Mechanical Engineer, Marine 2145.50
2144.1100 Architect, Naval 2145.55
2144.1200 Mechanical Engineer, Air-Conditioning 2145.60
2144.1301 Layout Engineer
2144.1302 Industrial Engineer (Workstation
Design)
2144.1401 Service Engineer – Installation
2144.1402 Service Engineer – Installation and
Commissioning
2144.9900 Mechanical Engineers, Other 2145.90
Family 2145 Chemical Engineers
2145.0100 Chemical Engineer, General 2146.10
2145.0200 Designer, Chemical Engineering 2146.20
2145.0300 Chemical Engineer, Paints and Varnish 2146.30
VOLUME I 53
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2145.0400 Chemical Engineer, Drugs and Acids 2146.35
2145.0500 Chemical Engineer, Petroleum 2146.40
2145.0600 Chemical Engineer, Fertilizers 2146.45
2145.0700 Chemical Engineer, Food 2146.50
2145.0800 Technologist, Food/Chemical Engineer 2146.55
2145.0900 Technologist, Fuel 2146.60
2145.1000 Oil Technologist 2146.62
2145.1100 Technologist, Paper 2146.68
2145.1200 Technologist, Alcohol 2146.70
2145.1300 Technologist, Rubber 2146.80
2145.1400 Technologist, Plastics 2146.85
2145.9900 Chemical Engineers and Technologists, Other 2146.90
Family 2146 Mining Engineers, Metallurgists and Related
Professionals
2146.0100 Mining Engineer, General 2147.10
2146.0200 Mining Engineer, Non-Metals 2147.20
2146.0300 Mining Engineer, Metal 2147.25
2146.0400 Mining Engineer, Petroleum and Gas 2147.30
2146.0500 Metallurgist, Extractive 2147.40
2146.0501 Manager Heat Treatment/Metallurgist
2146.0600 Metallurgists, Adaptive 2147.50
2146.9900 Mining Engineers, Metallurgists and Related 2147.90
Professionals, Other
VOLUME I 54
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 2149 Engineering Professionals Not Elsewhere
Classified
2149.0100 Engineers and Related Technologists, Other 2149.90
Group 215 Electrotechnology Engineers
Family 2151 Electrical Engineers
2151.0100 Electrical Engineer, General 2143.10
2151.0200 Designer, Electrical Engineering 2143.20
2151.0201 Design Engineer
2151.0202 Electrical Design Developer
2151.0300 Electrical Engineer, Generation and Supply 2143.30
2151.0400 Illumination Engineer 2143.40
2151.0403 LED Light Design Engineer
2151.0404 LED Light Design Validation Engineer
2151.0601 System Analyst (PCB Design)
2151.0602 Systems Designer (PCB Design)
2151.0701 Design-For-Manufacture Engineer
2151.9900 Electrical Engineers, Other 2143.90
Family 2152 Electronics Engineers
2152.0200 Electronic Engineer 2144.60
2152.0301 Stress Analyst/Computer-Aided Test Executive 2144.65
2152.0400 Electro-Optical Engineer 2144.70
2152.0501 Design Engineer
VOLUME I 55
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2152.0502 Design-For-Test Engineer
2152.0601 Quality Engineer
2152.0801 Electronic Hardware Design Engineer
2152.0901 Verification Engineer
2152.0902 Testing and Validation Engineer
2152.9900 Electronics Engineers, Other 2144.90
Family 2153 Telecommunication Engineers
2153.0100 Telecommunication Engineer, General 2144.10
2153.0101 Telecom Terminal Equipment Application
Developer (Android)
2153.0102 Telecom Terminal Equipment Application (Native
Applications)
2153.0200 Radio Engineer, Telecommunication 2144.20
2153.0300 Microwave Engineer, Telecommunication 2144.30
2153.0400 Line Communication Engineer, Tele- 2144.40
Communication/Telecommunication
Engineer/Technician
2153.0500 Sound Engineer 2144.50
2153.0501 Sound Engineer, Media
2153.0511 Sound Designer
2153.0601 Core Engineer
2153.9900 Telecommunication Engineers, Other
Group 216 Architects, Planners, Surveyors and Designers
VOLUME I 56
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 2161 Building Architects
2161.0100 Architect 2141.10
2161.9900 Building Architects, Other 2141.90
Family 2162 Landscape Architects
Family 2163 Product and Garment Designers
2163.0100 Package Designer/Packaging Designer 3471.80
2163.0201 Design Merchandiser
2163.0301 Hand Sketch Designer (Basic)
2163.0400 Furniture Designer 3471.20
2163.0500 Fashion Designer 3471.40
2163.0600 Textile Designer 3471.45
Family 2164 Town and Traffic Planners
2164.0100 Town Planner 2141.20
2164.0200 Traffic Planner 2141.30
Family 2165 Cartographers and Surveyors
2165.0100 Cartographer 2148.10
2165.0200 Surveyor, Topographical 2148.20
2165.0300 Aerial – Photograph Interpreter 2148.25
2165.0400 Surveyor, Photogrammetric 2148.30
2165.0500 Surveyor, Mine 2148.40
2165.0600 Surveyor, Hydrographic 2148.50
2165.9900 Cartographers and Surveyors, Other 2148.90
VOLUME I 57
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 2166 Graphic and Multimedia Designers
2166.0100 Commercial Artist 2452.60
2166.0111 Art Director
2166.0201 Multimedia Artist and Animator/Animator 2452.70
2166.0202 Modeller
2166.0203 Rigging Artist
2166.0204 Texturing Artist
2166.0205 Animation Director
2166.0206 Character Designer
2166.0207 Clean-Up Artist
2166.0208 Compositor
2166.0209 Storyboard Artist
2166.0210 Rendering Artist
2166.0211 VFX Editor
2166.0212 Roto Artist
2166.0300 Web Designer 2452.80
2166.0401 Designer (CAD)
2166.0501 Graphic Designer 3471.70
2166.0511 Colour Key Artist
2166.0512 Colourist
Sub- 22 Health Professionals
Division
VOLUME I 58
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Group 221 Medical Doctors
Family 2211 Generalist Medical Practitioners
2211.0100 Physician, General 2221.10
2211.0200 Surgeon, General 2221.15
2211.0300 Anatomist, Medical 2221.20
2211.0400 Anaesthetist 2221.25
2211.0500 Psychiatrist 2221.30
2211.9900 Generalist Medical Practitioners, Allopathic, 2221.90
Other
Family 2212 Specialist Medical Practitioners
2212.0100 Neurologist 2221.35
2212.0200 Dermatologist 2221.40
2212.0300 Allergy Specialist 2221.42
2212.0400 Ear, Nose and Throat Specialist 2221.45
2212.0500 Cardiologist 2221.50
2212.0600 Radiologist 2221.55
2212.0700 Tuberculosis Specialist 2221.60
2212.0800 Ophthalmologist 2221.65
2212.0900 Urologist 2221.68
2212.1000 Venereologist 2221.70
2212.1100 Obstetrician 2221.75
2212.1200 Gynaecologist 2221.78
VOLUME I 59
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2212.1300 Paediatrician 2221.80
2212.1400 Orthopaedist 2221.85
2212.1500 Pharmacologist 2212.30
2212.1600 Toxicologist (Pharmaceutical) 2212.35
2212.1700 Pathologist, Medical 2212.40
2212.1800 Malariologist, Medical 2212.45
2212.1900 Physiologist, Medical 2212.50
2212.9900 Specialist Medical Practitioners, Other 2212.90
Group 222 Nursing and Midwifery Professionals
Family 2221 Nursing Professionals
2221.0100 Nurse, Specialist 2230.10
2221.9900 Professional Nurses, Other 2230.90
Family 2222 Midwifery Professionals
Group 223 Traditional and Complementary Medicine
Professionals
Family 2230 Traditional and Complementary Medicine
Professionals
2230.0100 Physician, Ayurvedic 2222.10
2230.0200 Physician, Homeopathic 2223.10
2230.0300 Physician, Bio-Chemic/Bio Chemist 2223.20
2230.0400 Physician, Unani 2224.10
2230.9900 Traditional Medicine Practitioners, Other 3241.90
Group 224 Paramedical Practitioners
VOLUME I 60
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 2240 Paramedical Practitioners
2240.0100 Laboratory Assistant, Clinical 3221.10
2240.0400 Dresser 3221.40
2240.0501 Emergency Medical Technician – Basic
2240.0502 Emergency Medical Technician – Advanced
2240.9900 Paramedical Practitioners, Other
Group 225 Veterinarians
Family 2250 Veterinarians
2250.0100 Animal Pathologist 2212.60
2250.0200 Veterinarian, General 2226.10
2250.0300 Veterinarian, Surgeon 2226.20
2250.0400 Animal Genetist 2226.30
2250.0500 Zoo Veterinarian 2226.40
2250.0600 Veterinarian, Poultry 2226.50
2250.9900 Veterinarians, Other 2226.90
Group 226 Other Health Professionals
Family 2261 Dentists
2261.0100 Dentist 2225.10
2261.0200 Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon 2225.20
2261.0300 Orthodontist 2225.30
2261.0400 Periodontist 2225.40
2261.0500 Prosthodontist 2225.50
VOLUME I 61
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2261.0600 Paediatric Dentist 2225.60
2261.9900 Dental Specialists, Other 2225.90
Family 2262 Pharmacists
2262.0100 Chemist, Pharmaceuticals 2113.70
2262.0101 Chemist, Pharmaceuticals
Family 2263 Environmental and Occupational Health and
Hygiene Professionals
2263.0100 Health Officer 2229.10
2263.0200 Administrator, Hospital 2229.15
2263.9900 Environmental and Occupational Health and 3152.90
Hygiene Professionals, Other
Family 2264 Physiotherapists
2264.0100 Physiotherapist 3226.10
2264.0200 Occupational Therapist 3226.20
2264.0300 Chiropodist 3226.30
2264.0400 Masseur 3226.40
2264.0401 Sports Masseur
2264.9900 Physiotherapists and Related Associate 3226.90
Professionals, Other
Family 2265 Dieticians and Nutritionists
2265.0100 Nutritionist, General 3223.10
2265.0200 Dietician, General 3223.20
2265.0201 Dietician Assistant
VOLUME I 62
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2265.0300 Animal Nutritionist 3223.30
2265.9900 Dieticians and Nutritionists, Other 3223.90
Family 2266 Audiologists and Speech Therapists
2266.0100 Speech Therapist and Audiologist 3229.10
2266.0200 Speech Pathologist 3229.20
2266.0300 Voice Pathologist 3229.30
2266.0401 Speech Language Pathologist and Audiologist
Family 2267 Optometrists and Ophthalmic Opticians
2267.9900 Optometrists and Opticians, Other 3224.90
Family 2269 Health Professionals Not Elsewhere Classified
2269.0100 Naturopath 2229.20
2269.0200 Physician, Osteopathic 2229.30
2269.0300 Physician, Sidha 2229.40
2269.0400 Physicians and Surgeons, Other 2229.90
2269.0500 Orthotist and Prosthetist 3229.40
2269.0600 Orientation & Mobility Instructor 3229.50
2269.0700 Medical and Health Technicians, Other 3229.90
Sub- 23 Teaching Professionals
Division
Group 231 University and Higher Education Teachers
Family 2310 University and Higher Education Teachers
2310.0100 University and College Teacher, Arts 2310.10
Subjects/Professors/Assistant Professors, Arts
VOLUME I 63
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Subjects
2310.0200 University and College Teacher, Commerce 2310.15
Subjects/Professors/Assistant Professors,
Commerce Subjects
2310.0300 University and College Teacher, Management 2310.18
Subjects/Professors/Assistant Professors,
Management Subjects
2310.0400 University and College Teacher, 2310.20
Law/Professors/Assistant Professors, Education
2310.0500 University and College Teacher, 2310.30
Law/Professors/Assistant Professors, Law
2310.0600 University and College Teacher, Science 2310.40
Subjects/Professors/Assistant Professors, Science
Subjects
2310.0700 University and College Teacher, Engineering/ 2310.45
Professors/Assistant Professors, Engineering
2310.0800 University and College Teacher, Information 2310.48
Technology/Professors/Assistant Professors,
Information Technology
2310.0900 University and College Teacher, Medicine and 2310.50
Surgery/Professors/Assistant Professors,
Medicine and Surgery
2310.1000 University and College Teacher, Veterinary 2310.60
Science/Professors/Assistant Professors,
Veterinary Science
2310.1100 University and College Teacher, Agricultural 2310.70
Subjects
2310.1200 University and College Teacher, Fine 2310.80
Arts/Professors/Assistant Professors, Fine Arts
2310.9900 Professors/Assistant Professors, Other 2310.90
VOLUME I 64
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Group 232 Vocational Education Teachers
Family 2320 Vocational Education Teachers
2320.0101 Certified Training Assessor
2320.0102 Physical Security Trainer
Group 233 Secondary Education Teachers
Family 2330 Secondary Education Teachers
2330.0100 Senior Secondary and Secondary School Teacher, 2320.10
Arts
2330.0200 Senior Secondary and Secondary School Teacher, 2320.12
Science
2330.0300 Senior Secondary and Secondary School Teacher, 2320.15
Commerce
2330.0400 Language Teacher, Senior Secondary and 2320.20
Secondary School
2330.9900 Senior Secondary and Secondary School 2320.90
Teachers, Other
Group 234 Primary School and Early Childhood Teachers
Family 2341 Primary School Teachers
2341.0100 Middle School Teacher 3311.10
2341.0200 Language Teacher, Middle School 3311.20
2341.0400 Primary School Teacher 3312.10
2341.9900 Primary School Teachers, Other 3312.90
Family 2342 Early Childhood Educators
2342.0100 Teacher, Infant School/Teacher Pre-Primary 3320.10
VOLUME I 65
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2342.9900 Pre-Primary Education Teaching Associate 3320.90
Professionals, Other
Group 235 Other Teaching Professionals
Family 2351 Education Method Specialists
2351.0100 School Inspector 2332.10
2351.9900 Education Methods Specialists, Other 2331.90
2352 Special Needs Teachers
2352.0100 Teacher for Visually Impaired 3330.10
2352.0200 Teacher for Hearing-Impaired 3330.20
2352.0300 Teacher for Differently-Abled (Mental) 3330.30
2352.0400 Teacher for Differently-Abled (Physical) 3330.40
2352.9900 Teacher for Differently-Abled, Other 3330.90
Family 2353 Other Language Professionals
Family 2354 Other Music Teachers
Family 2355 Other Arts Teachers
2355.0100 Art Teacher 2339.10
2355.9900 Arts Teacher, Other 2339.90
Family 2356 Information Technology Trainers
2356.0100 Manual Training Teacher/Craft Instructor 3340.10
2356.0301 Master Trainer for Junior Software Developer
2356.9900 Information Technology Trainers, Other 3340.90
Family 2359 Teaching Professionals Not Elsewhere Classified
VOLUME I 66
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2359.0100 Handwork Teacher/Teacher, Art and Craft 3340.20
Sub- 24 Business and Administrative Professionals
Division
Group 241 Finance Professionals
Family 2411 Accountants
2411.0100 Accountant 2411.10
2411.0101 Associate – Transactional Finance & Accounting
2411.0200 Auditor 2411.20
2411.0201 Associate – Finance & Accounting Complex
2411.0300 Cost Accountant 2411.30
Family 2412 Financial and Investment Advisors
2412.0100 Financial Examiner 2411.40
2412.0200 Financial Analyst 2411.50
2412.0300 Budget Analyst 2411.60
2412.0400 Risk Management Analyst 2411.70
2412.0501 Agriculture Field Officer
2412.0600 Commission Agent 3411.40
2412.9900 Financial and Investment Advisors, Other 2411.90
Family 2413 Financial Analysts
Group 242 Administration Professionals
Family 2421 Management and Organization Analysts
VOLUME I 67
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2421.0101 Analyst – Research
Family 2422 Policy Administration Professionals
Family 2423 Personal and Careers Professionals
2423.0100 Vocational Guidance Officer/Career Counsellors 2412.40
2423.0101 Associate – Recruitment
2423.0200 Counsellor 2412.50
2423.0500 Occupational Analyst 2412.75
2423.9900 Personal and Careers Professionals, Other 2412.90
Family 2424 Training and Staff Development Professionals
2424.0100 Manpower Officer/Area Manager, Human 2412.10
Resource
2424.0200 Employment Officer/Operation Head, 2412.20
Employment
2424.0300 Human Resource Manager 2412.30
2424.0401 Sales Training Manager
2424.0402 Sales/Service Trainer (Dealer)
2424.0501 Service Training Centre In-Charge
2424.0502 Field Service Trainer
2424.9900 Training and Staff Development Professionals,
Other
Group 243 Sales, Marketing and Public Relations
Professionals
Family 2431 Advertising and Marketing Professionals
VOLUME I 68
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2431.0100 Market Research Analyst 2419.40
2431.0101 Regional Service Marketing Manager
2431.0102 Regional Service Process Manager
2431.0201 Product Brand Manager (Automotive)
2431.0202 Account Executive (Advertising Agency)
2431.0300 Caption Writer 2451.47
2431.0400 Advertisement Writer 2451.50
2431.0501 Market Research Associate – Sales &
Marketing/Business Development
2431.0502 Management Trainee – Sales &
Marketing/Business Development
2431.0503 Market Research Associate – Product Marketing
2431.0504 Management Trainee – Product Marketing
2431.0601 Product Executive
2431.0651 Sales Executive (Media Org)
2431.0671 Traffic Co-Ordinator
2431.0700 Creative Writer 2451.52
2431.0800 Propagandist 3411.30
2431.9900 Advertising and Marketing Professionals, Other
Family 2432 Public Relations Professionals
2432.0100 Publicity Officer 2419.10
2432.0200 Public Relations Officer 2419.20
2432.0201 Digital Marketing/Social Media Manager
VOLUME I 69
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2432.0300 Information Officer 2419.30
2432.9900 Public Relations Professionals, Other 2419.90
Family 2433 Technical and Medical Sales Professional
(Excluding ICT)
2433.0101 Area Sales Officer
2433.0201 Medical Representative 3415.20
2433.0301 Sales Executive – Medical Electronics
2433.0401 Sales Executive – Consumer Electronics
2433.0501 Sales Executive – Solar Electronics
2433.0601 Business Development Executive
2433.0700 Field Officer, Insurance 3415.50
Family 2434 Information and Communications Technology
Sales Professionals
2434.0101 Sales and Pre-Sales Analyst
2434.0201 Sales/Pre-Sales Executive
Sub- 25 Information and Communication Technology
Division Professionals
Group 251 Software and Application Developers, and
Analysts
Family 2511 System Analysts
2511.0100 System Analysts 2131.10
2511.0101 Deployment Engineer
2511.0102 Engineer – Software Transition
VOLUME I 70
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2511.0103 Engineer – Packaging
2511.0104 Engineer – Product Lifecycle Management (PLM)
2511.0105 Analyst
2511.0106 Support Engineer
2511.9900 System Analysts, Other 2131.90
Family 2512 Software Developers
2512.0100 Computer Programmer/Software Engineer 2132.10
2512.0201 Software Engineer 2132.20
2512.0202 Test Engineer – Software
2512.0203 Design Engineer(Product Engineer)
2512.0204 Software Developer – Application Development
2512.0205 Junior Software Developer
2512.0206 Engineer Trainee – IT Services
2512.0207 Engineer Trainee – Engineering Analysis
2512.0300 Programmer Analyst 2132.30
2512.0301 Software Developer – Product Development and
Delivery
2512.0401 FPGA Design Engineer
2512.0501 Embedded Software Engineer
2512.0601 Design Engineer – Engineering Analysis
2512.0701 Application Maintenance Engineer
2512.0800 Programmer, Engineering and Scientific/System 2132.40
Programmer
VOLUME I 71
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 2513 Web and Multimedia Developers
2513.0101 Web Developer
2513.0201 User Interface Developer
2513.0301 Media Developer – Product Development and
Delivery
2513.0302 Media Developer – Application Development
Family 2514 Applications Programmers
2514.9900 Computer Programmers, Other 2132.90
Family 2519 Software and Application Developers and
Analysts Not Elsewhere Classified
2519.0100 System Programmer 2132.50
2519.0300 Quality Assurance Analyst (Computers) 2139.10
2519.0301 Quality Assurance Engineer – IT Services
2519.0302 Test Engineer – IT Services
2519.0401 Quality Assurance Engineer – Software Products
2519.0402 Test Engineer – Software Products
2519.0501 Quality Engineer
Group 252 Database and Network Professionals
Family 2521 Database designers and Administrators
2521.0100 Database Design Analyst 2139.20
2521.0202 Junior Data Associate
Family 2522 Systems Administrators
2522.0100 Database Administrator 2139.30
VOLUME I 72
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2522.0201 Security Analyst
Family 2523 Computer Network Professionals
2523.0100 Data Communication Analyst/Network 2131.20
Administrator
2523.0200 Computer System Hardware Analyst/Hardware 2139.40
Engineer
2523.0301 Tester/Test Engineer – Hardware
2523.0401 Design Engineer
2523.0501 Hardware Engineer
2523.9900 Computer Network Professionals, Other 2139.90
Family 2529 Database and Network Professionals Not
Elsewhere Classified
Sub- 26 Legal, Social and Cultural Professionals
Division
Group 261 Legal Professionals
Family 2611 Lawyers
2611.0100 Attorney General of India 2421.10
2611.0200 Solicitor General of India 2421.20
2611.0300 Advocate General 2421.30
2611.0400 Legal Remembrancer 2421.40
2611.0500 Government Advocate 2421.50
2611.0600 Public Prosecutor 2421.60
2611.0700 Police Prosecutor 2421.65
VOLUME I 73
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2611.0800 Attorney at Law 2421.70
2611.0900 Advocate 2421.80
2611.1001 Intellectual Property Executive
2611.1002 Legal Associate
2611.9900 Lawyers, Other 2421.90
Family 2612 Judges
2612.0100 Judge, Supreme Court 2422.10
2612.0200 Judge, High Court 2422.20
2612.0300 District and Session Judge 2422.30
2612.0400 Munsif 2422.40
2612.0500 Judge, Subordinate Court 2422.50
2612.0600 Magistrate 2422.60
2612.0700 Magistrate, Juvenile Court 2422.65
2612.0800 Chairman, Administrative Tribunal 2422.70
2612.0900 Member, Administrative Tribunal 2422.72
2612.1000 President, Industrial Tribunal 2422.75
2612.1100 Member, Industrial Tribunal 2422.80
2612.1200 President, Consumer Redressal Forum 2422.85
2612.1300 Member, Consumer Redressal Forum 2422.87
2612.9900 Judges and Magistrates, Other 2422.90
Family 2619 Legal Professionals, Not Elsewhere Classified
2619.0100 Prothonotary and Senior Master 2429.10
VOLUME I 74
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2619.0200 Registrar (Appellate Side, High Court) 2429.20
2619.0300 Registrar 2429.25
2619.0400 Master Official Referee and Registrar in Equity 2429.30
and Commissioner for Taking Accounts (High
Court)
2619.0500 Taxing Master 2429.40
2619.0600 Insolvency Registrar 2429.45
2619.0700 Official Assignee (High Court) 2429.50
2619.0800 Court Receiver and Liquidator 2429.55
2619.0900 Sheriff 2429.60
2619.1000 Coroner 2429.65
2619.9900 Legal Professionals, Other 2429.90
Group 262 Librarians, Archivists and Curators
Family 2621 Archivists and Curators
2621.0100 Archivist 2431.10
2621.0200 Curator (Museum) 2431.20
2621.0300 Restorer, Painting 2431.30
2621.0400 Restorer, Lace and Textile 2431.40
2621.0500 Restorer, Ceramics 2431.50
2621.0600 Restorer, Paper and Prints 2431.55
2621.0700 Restorer, Furniture 2431.60
2621.9900 Archivists and Curators, Other 2431.90
Family 2622 Librarians and Related Information
VOLUME I 75
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Professionals
2622.0100 Librarian 2432.10
2622.0200 Librarian (Film) 2432.20
2622.0300 Tape Librarian/Librarian Digital/Librarian Media 2432.25
2622.0500 News Librarian 2432.40
2622.0601 Document Coder/Processor
2622.9900 Librarians and Related Information Professionals, 2432.90
Other
Group 263 Social and Religious Professionals
Family 2631 Economists
2631.0100 Economist 2441.10
2631.0200 Energy Economist 2441.20
2631.0300 Home Economist 2441.30
2631.9900 Economists, Other 2441.90
Family 2632 Sociologists, Anthropologists and Related
Professionals
2632.0100 Sociologist, General 2442.10
2632.0200 Social Ecologist 2442.20
2632.0300 Clinical Sociologist 2442.25
2632.0400 Demographer 2442.30
2632.0500 Criminologists 2442.40
2632.0600 Penologist 2442.50
2632.0700 Anthropologist, General 2442.60
VOLUME I 76
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2632.0800 Anthropologist, Physical 2442.70
2632.0900 Anthropologist, Cultural 2442.75
2632.1000 Genealogist 2442.77
2632.1100 Archaeologist 2442.80
2632.1200 Geographer 2442.85
2632.9900 Sociologists, Anthropologists and Related 2442.90
Professionals, Other
Family 2633 Philosophers, Historians and Political Scientists
2633.0100 Historian 2443.10
2633.0200 Biographer 2443.20
2633.0300 Epigraphist 2443.30
2633.0400 Numismatist 2443.40
2633.0500 Philatelist 2443.50
2633.0600 Political Scientist 2443.60
2633.9900 Philosophers, Historians and Political Scientists, 2443.90
Other
Family 2634 Psychologists
2634.0100 Psychologist 2445.10
2634.0200 Psychometrist 2445.20
2634.0300 Psychologist, Engineering 2445.30
2634.0400 Psychologist, Educational 2445.40
2634.0500 Psychologist, Social 2445.50
2634.0600 Clinical Psychologist 2445.60
VOLUME I 77
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2634.0700 Industrial – Organizational Psychologist 2445.70
2634.0800 Psychologist, Counselling 2445.80
2634.9900 Psychologists, Other 2445.90
Family 2635 Social Work and Counselling Professionals
2635.0100 Labour Welfare Officer 2446.10
2635.0200 Women’s Welfare Officer 2446.20
2635.0300 Probation Officer 2446.30
2635.0400 Medical Social Worker 2446.40
2635.0500 Child and Family Social Worker 2446.42
2635.0600 Health Educator 2446.45
2635.0700 Women’s Welfare Organizer 2446.50
2635.0800 Child Welfare Organizer 2446.55
2635.0900 Family Planning Organizer 2446.60
2635.1000 Vocational Rehabilitation Counsellor 2446.80
2635.1100 Counsellor, Marriage and Family 2446.85
2635.9900 Social Work Professionals, Other 2446.90
Family 2636 Religious Professionals
2636.0100 Priest 2461.10
2636.0200 Purohit 2462.10
2636.9900 Ordained Religious and Non-Ordained Religious 2462.90
Workers
Group 264 Authors, Journalists and Linguists
VOLUME I 78
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 2641 Authors and Related Writers
2641.0100 Author 2451.10
2641.0200 Critic 2451.15
2641.0300 Editor 2451.20
2641.0302 Script Editor
2641.0400 Sub-Editor 2451.25
2641.0500 Poet 2451.65
2641.0601 Script Writer 2451.70
2641.0602 Script Researcher
2641.0701 Associate – Editorial
2641.0801 Associate – Learning
2641.0901 Technical Writer – Product Documentation
2641.0902 Technical Writer – Application Development
2641.0903 Technical Writer – Technical Documentation/
Writing
2641.9900 Authors, Journalists and Other Writers 2451.90
Family 2642 Journalists
2642.0100 News Reporter 2451.30
2642.0200 Columnist 2451.35
2642.0300 Freelance Journalist 2451.40
2642.0400 Commentary Writer 2451.45
2642.0500 Radio Commentator 2451.55
VOLUME I 79
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2642.0600 Commentator (Motion Picture) 2451.60
Family 2643 Translators, Interpreters and Other Linguists
2643.0100 Language Specialist 2444.10
2643.0200 Translator 2444.20
2643.0300 Interpreter 2444.30
2643.0401 Language Translator – Software Products
2643.0402 Language Translator – IT Services
2643.9900 Philologists, Translators and Interpreters, Other 2444.90
Group 265 Creative and Performing Artists
Family 2651 Visual Artists
2651.0100 Sculptor 2452.10
2651.0200 Modeller (Except Stone) 2452.20
2651.0300 Stone Modeller 2452.30
2651.0400 Painter, Fine Art 2452.40
2651.0500 Renovator, Paintings 2452.50
2651.0600 Cartoonist 2452.55
2651.9900 Visual Artists, Other 2452.90
Family 2652 Musicians, Singers and Composers
2652.0100 Music Composer 2453.10
2652.0200 Orchestra Conductor 2453.20
2652.0300 Singer 2453.30
2652.0400 Instrumental Musician, String Instrument 2453.40
VOLUME I 80
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2652.0500 Instrumental Musician, Percussion Instrument 2453.50
2652.0600 Instrumental Musician, Wind Instrument 2453.60
2652.9900 Musicians, Singers and Composers, Other 2453.90
Family 2653 Dancers and Choreographers
2653.0100 Choreographer 2454.10
2653.0200 Nattuvan 2454.20
2653.0300 Dancer 2454.30
2653.9900 Choreographers and Dancers, Other 2454.90
Family 2654 Film, Stage and Related Directors and Producers
2654.0100 Director, Theatrical 2455.10
2654.0200 Director, Music 2455.20
2654.0300 Dance Director 2455.30
2654.0351 Live Action Director
2654.0400 Director, Research (Motion Picture, Radio & TV) 2455.40
2654.0500 Manager, Recreation and Entertainment 1229.10
2654.0600 Producer, Stage 1229.30
2654.0700 Producer, Film 1229.40
2654.0800 Production Manager (Motion Picture) 1229.50
2654.0901 Lighting Artist
2654.9900 Stage and Film Directors, Other 2455.90
Family 2655 Actors
2655.0100 Actor and Actress 2455.50
VOLUME I 81
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
2655.0200 Extra 2455.60
2655.0301 Voice Over Artist
Family 2656 Announcers on Radio, Television and Other
Media
2656.0100 Programme Announcer 3472.10
2656.0200 Disc Jockey 3472.20
2656.9900 Radio, Television and Other Announcers, Other 3472.90
Family 2659 Creative and Performing Artists Not Elsewhere
Classified
2659.0100 Rope Dancer 3474.10
2659.0200 Acrobat 3474.15
2659.0300 Equestrian 3474.20
2659.0400 Contortionist 3474.30
2659.0500 Circus Performers, Other 3474.35
2659.0600 Ventriloquist 3474.40
2659.0700 Buffoon; Clown 3474.42
2659.0800 Mimic 3474.45
2659.0900 Magician 3474.50
2659.1000 Juggler 3474.55
2659.1100 Snake Charmer 3474.70
2659.1200 Puppeteer 3474.75
2659.1300 Trainer, Animal 3474.60
2659.1400 Race Horse Trainer 3474.65
VOLUME I 82
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Division 3 Technicians and Associate Professionals
Sub- 31 Science and Engineering Associate Professionals
Division
Group 311 Physical and Engineering Science Technicians
Family 3111 Chemical and Physical Science Technicians
3111.0100 Laboratory Assistant, Physical 3111.10
3111.0200 Laboratory Assistant, Soil 3111.20
3111.0300 Laboratory Assistant, Chemical 3111.30
3111.0400 Chemical Radiation Technician 3111.35
3111.0500 Laboratory Assistant, Geological 3111.40
3111.0600 Slide Examiner, Petrology 3111.50
3111.0700 Slide Examiner, Palaeontology 3111.60
3111.9900 Physical Science Technicians, Other 3111.90
Family 3112 Civil Engineering Technicians
3112.0100 Overseer, Civil Engineering 3112.10
3112.0200 Permanent Way Inspector 3112.20
3112.0300 Plain Tabler 3112.30
3112.0400 Topographical Auxiliary 3112.40
3112.0500 Computer Topographical 3112.50
3112.0600 Surveyor, Tidal 3112.60
3112.0701 Assistant Laboratory and Field Technician
3112.9900 Civil Engineering Technicians, Other 3112.90
VOLUME I 83
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 3113 Electrical Engineering Technicians
3113.0101 Electrical Engineering, Technician/Maintenance 3113.10
Technician Electrical
3113.0102 Maintenance Technician Electrical
3113.0111 Technician Furnace Transformers: Ferro Alloys
3113.0200 Electrical Technician (High Voltage) 3113.20
3113.0300 Energy Auditor 3113.30
3113.0401 Machine Maintenance Technician
3113.0501 Maintenance Executive
3113.0601 Maintenance Technician
3113.0701 Customer Inspection Technician
3113.0801 In-Process and Final Quality Engineer
3113.0802 Final Testing Technician
3113.0803 Automated Optical Inspection Machine Operator
3113.0901 Cluster In-Charge
3113.1001 LED Luminaries Testing and Measurement
3113.1002 LED Light Repair Technician
3113.9900 Electrical Technicians, Other 3113.90
Family 3114 Electronics Engineering Technicians
3114.0100 Electronics Technician 3114.10
3114.0200 Television Chassis Inspector/Television Technician 3152.60
VOLUME I 84
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3114.0601 BSS Support Engineer
3114.0701 Field Maintenance Engineer
3114.0801 ICT Engineer
3114.0802 ICT Technician
3114.0804 Broadband Technician
3114.0901 Installation Engineer – L2 & L3
3114.0902 Installation Engineer Installation Engineer – SDH
& DWDM
3114.1101 Product Specialist Engineer
3114.1201 Transmission Engineer
3114.1301 Network Management Engineer
3114.9900 Electronics and Telecommunications Engineering 3114.90
Technicians, Other
Family 3115 Mechanical Engineering Technicians
3115.0101 Mechanical Engineering Technician/Supervisor 3115.10
R&D Testing
3115.0102 Maintenance Technician – Mechanical
3115.0103 Maintenance Technician Assistant – Mechanical
3115.0104 Body Shop In-Charge
3115.0105 Workshop Manager
3115.0201 Automotive Engineering Technician/Testing 3115.20
Manager
3115.0202 Test Engineer Product/Vehicle
VOLUME I 85
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3115.0301 Executive, Proto Manufacturing
3115.0401 Method Study Executive
3115.0501 Manager Maintenance Mechanical &
Electrical
3115.0601 Master Auto Service Technician/Auto Service
Technician
3115.0602 Auto Service Technical Manager/Auto Service
Technician
3115.1000 Aeronautical Engineering Technician 3115.30
3115.1100 Heating, Ventilation and Refrigeration Engineering 3115.40
Technician
3115.1200 Die Designer 3115.50
3115.1301 Tool Designer
3115.1302 Tool Room Supervisor
3115.1400 Loco Foreman 3115.60
3115.1500 Yard Foreman, Railway 3115.65
3115.1600 Train Examiner 3115.70
3115.9900 Mechanical Engineering Technicians, Other 3115.90
Family 3116 Chemical Engineering Technicians
3116.0100 Laboratory Assistant, Glass and Ceramics 3116.10
3116.0200 Laboratory Assistant, Food & Beverages/ Chemist/ 3116.20
Analytical Supervisor/Lab Chemist
3116.0300 Laboratory Assistant, Chemical Engineering 3116.30
General
VOLUME I 86
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3116.0400 Core Analyst, Petrol and Natural Gas 3116.40
3116.0500 Laboratory Assistant, Petroleum and Lubricants 3116.50
3116.0600 Chemist, Water Purification/Water Treatment 3116.60
3116.9900 Chemical Engineering Technicians, 3116.90
Other/Chemical Process Technicians
Family 3117 Mining and Metallurgical Technicians
3117.0100 Rock Slicer 3117.10
3117.0200 Petroleum and Natural Gas Extraction Technician 3117.20
3117.0300 Laboratory Assistant, Metallurgical 3117.30
3117.9900 Mining and Metallurgical Technicians, Other 3117.90
Family 3118 Draughtpersons
3118.0100 Draughtperson, Architectural 3118.10
3118.0200 Draughtperson, Civil 3118.20
3118.0201 Plumbing Draftsman
3118.0300 Draughtperson, Electrical 3118.30
3118.0301 Draftsman
3118.0302 Physical Design Engineer
3118.0401 Draughtperson, Mechanical 3118.40
3118.0402 Draughtsman – Mechanical
3118.0500 Draughtperson, Structural 3118.50
3118.0600 Draughtperson, Topographical 3118.60
3118.0700 Lithographic Designer 3118.70
VOLUME I 87
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3118.0800 Tracer 3118.80
3118.0900 Blue Printer 3118.85
3118.9900 Draughtpersons, Other 3118.90
Family 3119 Physical and Engineering Science Technicians Not
Elsewhere Classified
3119.0100 Laboratory Assistant, Engineering 3119.10
3119.0200 Forensic Science Technician 3119.20
3119.0300 Fingerprint Expert 3119.30
3119.0400 Handwriting Expert 3119.35
3119.0500 Impression Taker 3119.37
3119.0600 Weather Observer 3119.40
3119.0700 Methods, Time and Motion Study Technician 3119.50
3119.0800 Fire Prevention Officer 3151.10
3119.0900 Fire Officer 3151.20
3119.1000 Fire Inspectors, Other 3151.90
3119.1100 Laser Technician 3139.10
3119.9900 Optical and Electronic Equipment Controllers, 3139.90
Other
Group 312 Mining, Manufacturing and Construction
Supervisors
Family 3121 Mining Supervisors
3121.0100 Supervisor and Foreman, Mining and Quarrying 8118.10
3121.0200 Supervisor and Foreman, Well Drilling 8118.15
VOLUME I 88
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3121.0300 Supervisor and Foreman, Mineral Treating 8118.20
3121.0400 Overman, Colliery 8118.25
3121.0500 Sirdar, Colliery 8118.30
3121.0600 Mud Supervisor 8118.35
3121.0700 Well Pulling Supervisor 8118.40
3121.0800 Gas Supervisor 8118.50
3121.9900 Supervisors and Foremen in Mining and Mineral 8118.90
Processing Plant Operation Activities, Other
Family 3122 Manufacturing Supervisors
3122.0100 Supervisors and Foremen, Metal Making, 8128.10
Converting and Refining
3122.0200 Foreman, Blast Furnace 8128.20
3122.0300 Stock House Foreman 8128.30
3122.0400 Supervisor and Foreman, Metal Treating 8128.40
3122.0500 Supervisor and Foreman, Metal Drawing and 8128.50
Extruding
3122.0601 Assembly Line Supervisor
3122.0800 Supervisor and Foreman, Glass Forming and 8138.10
Related Activities
3122.0900 Supervisor and Foreman, Ceramics and Related 8138.20
Activities
3122.1000 Supervisor and Foreman, Wood Preparation and 8148.10
Papermaking
3122.1100 Supervisor and Foreman, Paper Pulp and 8148.20
Papermaking
VOLUME I 89
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3122.1300 Supervisor and Foreman, Chemical Processing and 8158.10
Related Activities
3122.1400 Supervisor and Foreman, Petroleum Refining and 8158.20
Related Activities/Operator/Engineering Assistant
(Mechanical/Electrical/Civil/Chemical) Related
Activities
3122.1600 Boiler Supervisor 8168.10
3122.1700 Supervisors and Foremen, Stationary Engine and 8168.20
Related Equipment
3122.1800 Supervisor and Foreman, Stone Cutting and 8218.10
Carving
3122.1900 Supervisor and Foreman, Machine Tool 8218.20
Operations
3122.2000 Supervisor and Foreman, Rubber Goods Making 8238.10
3122.2100 Supervisor and Foreman, Plastic Products Making 8238.20
3122.2200 Plastic Moulding Shop Supervisor
3122.2300 Plastic Moulding Shift In-Charge
3122.2400 Supervisor and Foreman, Wood Working 8248.10
(Machine)
3122.2500 Supervisor and Foreman, Carpentry, Cabinet 8248.20
Making and Related Wood Working Processes
3122.2600 Supervisor and Foreman, Paper and Paper Board 8258.10
Product Making
3122.2800 Jobber (Textile) 8268.10
3122.2900 Supervisor and Foreman, Hosiery 8268.20
3122.3000 Supervisor and Foreman, Tanning and Pelt 8268.30
Dressing
VOLUME I 90
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3122.3100 Supervisor and Foreman, Shoemaking 8268.40
3122.3200 Supervisor and Foreman, Harness and Saddle 8268.50
Making
3122.3300 Supervisor and Foreman, Leather Goods Making 8268.60
3122.3400 Supervisors and Foremen, Textile-Related 7435.05
Products
3122.3450 Scouring Supervisor, Wool 7431.26
3122.3500 Supervisors and Foremen, Tailoring and Dress 7433.05
Making
3122.3551 Production Supervisor – Sewing
3122.3600 Supervisor and Foreman, Brush Making 7424.05
3122.3800 Supervisor and Foreman, Tobacco Preparation, 8279.10
Cigar and Cigarette Making
3122.3900 Supervisor and Foreman, Tobacco Product Making 8279.20
3122.4000 Supervisor and Foreman, Material and Freight 8290.10
Handling
3122.4100 Supervisor and Foreman, Checking, Sorting, 8290.20
Packing and Related Activities
3122.4200 Supervisor and Foreman, Welding and Flame 7218.10
Cutting
3122.4300 Supervisor and Foreman, Sheet and Structural 7218.20
Metal Working
3122.4401 Casting Line In-Charge
3122.4402 Casting Line Supervisor
3122.4501 Forging Shop Shift In-Charge
VOLUME I 91
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3122.4502 Forging Shop Supervisor
3122.4601 Press Shop Shift In-Charge
3122.4602 Press Shop Supervisor
3122.4701 Welding Machine Setter
3122.4702 Welding Supervisor
3122.4900 Supervisor and Foreman, Blacksmith 7228.10
3122.5000 Supervisor and Foreman, Tool Making/Die Making 7228.20
3122.5200 Supervisor and Foreman, Machinery Fitting and 7238.10
Repairing
3122.5300 Supervisor and Foreman, Motor Vehicle Repairing 7238.20
3122.5400 Supervisor and Foreman, Aircraft Repairing 7238.30
3122.5600 Supervisor and Foreman, Electrical and Electronic 7248.10
Equipment
3122.5700 Engineering Supervisor, Telephone 7248.20
3122.5800 Sub-Inspector, Telephone 7248.30
3122.5900 Charge Hand, Rack Wiring (Telephone Equipment) 7248.40
Manufacturing
3122.6000 Line Supervisor, Electrical 7248.50
3122.6200 Supervisor and Foreman, Precision Instrument 7318.10
Making (Except Electrical)
3122.6300 Supervisor and Foreman, Musical Instrument 7318.20
Making
3122.6400 Supervisor, Jewellery, Engraving and Precision 7318.30
Metal Workers
VOLUME I 92
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3122.6501 Wax Model Making Supervisor
3122.6502 Product Development Manager
3122.6503 Planning Supervisor
3122.6504 Blade Sawing Supervisor
3122.6505 Laser Supervisor
3122.6506 Bruting Supervisor
3122.6507 Blocking Supervisor
3122.6508 Polishing Supervisor
3122.6509 Final Assortment Supervisor
3122.6511 Supervisor Faceting and Polishing
3122.6600 Supervisor and Foreman, Photolitho, Photo 7348.10
Engraving and Dark Room Operations
3122.6700 Supervisor and Foreman, Printing and Related 7348.20
Work
3122.6900 Supervisor and Foreman, Food 7418.10
Processing/Production Supervisor
3122.7000 Juice Clarification Supervisor 7418.20
3122.7100 Supervisor and Foreman, Brewing, Aerated Water 7418.30
and Beverage Making
3122.7200 Supervisor and Foreman, Dairy Products/Dairy 7418.40
Technologist
3122.8001 Rubber Nursery Supervisor
3122.9900 Manufacturing Supervisors, Other
Family 3123 Construction Supervisors
VOLUME I 93
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3123.0100 Work Supervisor, Construction 7138.10
3123.0200 Supervisor and Foreman, Insulation 7138.20
3123.0300 Supervisor and Foreman, Plumbing and Pipe 7138.30
Fitting
3123.0301 Plumbing Foreman
3123.0302 Plumbing Supervisor
3123.0400 Electrical Supervisor, Wiring, 7138.40
3123.0500 Supervisor and Foreman, Painting 7148.10
3123.0600 Painting and Surface Treatment Line In-Charge
3123.0700 Painting Supervisor
3123.9900 Supervisors and Foremen and Related Trades 7148.90
Workers in Painting, Building Structure Cleaning,
Other
Group 313 Process Control Technicians
Family 3131 Power Production Plant Operators
3131.0100 Stationary Engine Driver, Steam 8161.10
3131.0200 Stationary Engine Driver, Internal Combustion 8161.20
3131.0300 Turbine Operator, Steam 8161.30
3131.0400 Turbine Operator, Hydel 8161.40
3131.0500 Power Plant Operator 8161.45
3131.0600 Electrical Switch Board Operator 8161.50
3131.0700 Oiler and Greaser, Stationary Engine and 8161.60
Machinery
VOLUME I 94
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3131.0800 Nuclear Plant Control Operator 8161.65
3131.0900 Breaker Tender 8161.70
3131.1000 Hopper Attendant/Hopper Machine Operator 8161.72
3131.1100 Load Dispatcher 8161.80
3131.9900 Power Production Plant Operators, Other
Family 3132 Incinerator and Water Treatment Plant
Operators
3132.0100 Ice Maker 8163.10
3132.0200 Reservoir Caretaker 8163.20
3132.0300 Gas-Compressor Operator 8163.30
3132.0400 Wastewater Treatment Plant Operator 8163.40
3132.0500 Heating Plant Superintendent 8163.50
3132.0600 Pump Station Operator, Waterworks 8163.60
3132.0700 Air Compressor Operator 8169.10
3132.0800 Ammonia Compressor Attendant 8169.20
3132.0900 Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Plant 8169.30
Attendant
3132.1000 Pumpman 8169.40
3132.1100 Exhaust Fan Operator 8169.50
3132.1200 Blower Operator 8169.60
3132.1300 Incinerator Operator 8169.65
3132.9900 Incinerator and Water Treatment Plant Operators,
Other
VOLUME I 95
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 3133 Chemical Processing Plant Controllers
3133.0100 Process Man, Chemical 8152.10
3133.0200 Furnace Operator (Chemical) 8152.60
3133.0300 Boiling Tub Operator (Chemical) 8152.65
3133.0400 Batch Still Operator, Chemical 8154.10
3133.0500 Continuous Still Operator, Chemical 8154.20
3133.0600 Bleaching Operator, Chemical 8159.30
3133.0700 Chemical Process Operator (Radioactive 8159.50
Materials)
3133.0800 Hot Cell Technician 8159.52
3133.9900 Chemical Processing Plant Controllers, Other
Family 3134 Petroleum and Natural Gas Refining Plant
Operators
3134.0100 Continuous Still Operator, Petroleum 8155.10
3134.0200 Still Man Gas Plant/Gas Plant Operator (Petrol 8155.20
Refining)
3134.0300 Pump Man (Petroleum Refining) 8155.30
3134.0400 Control Man (Petroleum Refining) 8155.40
3134.0500 Blender (Petroleum Refining) 8155.50
3134.0600 Paraffin Plant Operator (Petrol Refining) 8155.60
3134.0700 Pump Station Operator 8155.70
3134.0800 Treating Plant Operator 8155.75
3134.9900 Petroleum Refining Workers, Other 8155.90
VOLUME I 96
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 3135 Metal Production Process Controllers
3135.0500 Mixerman 8121.30
3135.0600 Convertor Blower/Convertor Blower Technician 8121.35
3135.0700 Convertor Man/Convertor Blower Technician 8121.40
3135.0900 Furnace Operator (Non-Ferrous Metal) 8121.47
3135.1100 Furnace Operator, Open Hearth 8121.55
3135.1200 Furnace Operator, Second Hand, Open Hearth 8121.60
3135.1300 Furnace Operator (Smelting & Refining) 8121.70
3135.1401 Shift In-Charge Furnace Ferro Alloys
3135.1700 Roller, Merchant Mill/Mill Operator 8122.16
3135.1800 Roller, Sheet Mill/Mill Operator 8122.20
3135.1900 Operator, Hot Rolling Mill (Non-Ferrous 8122.28
Metal)/Mill Operator
3135.2000 Roller, Hot Rolling Mill (Non-Ferrous Metal)/Mill 8122.32
Operator
3135.2001 Fluid Management Operator Rolling Mills
3135.2002 Process Operator Rolling Mills
3135.2003 Coil Packaging Machine Operator Rolling Mills
3135.2300 Operator, Strip Mill (Non-Ferrous Metal) 8122.42
3135.2500 Seamless Pipe and Tube Roller 8122.46
3135.2600 Furnace Man, Reverberatory, Pulverised Coal 8122.48
Fired
3135.3001 Heat Treatment Shop Supervisor
VOLUME I 97
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3135.3100 Centrifugal Casting Machine Operator 8122.72
3135.3900 Control Man, Billet/Process Controller 8124.10
3135.9900 Metal Production Process Controllers, Other 8121.90
Family 3139 Process Control Technicians Not Elsewhere
Classified
3139.0100 Digester Operator, Paper Pulp 8142.20
3139.0200 Beaterman, Paper Pulp 8142.55
3139.0300 Machineman, Paper, Wet End 8143.15
3139.0400 Machineman, Paper, Dry End 8143.25
3139.0500 Calenderman, Paper 8143.65
3139.1400 Robotic Machine Operator 8172.10
3139.1501 Autocomponent Assembly Fitter
3139.2001 Assembly Supervisor
3139.5001 Quality Control Inspector
3139.5002 Quality Controller
3139.9900 Industrial Robot Operators, Other 8172.90
Group 314 Life Science Technicians and Related Associate
Professionals
Family 3141 Life Science Technicians (Excluding Medical)
3141.0100 Laboratory Assistant, Zoological 3211.10
3141.0200 Laboratory Assistant, Botanical 3211.20
3141.0300 Taxidermist 3211.30
3141.9900 Life Science Technicians (Excluding Medical),
VOLUME I 98
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Other
Family 3142 Agricultural Technicians
3142.0101 Micro Irrigation Technician
3142.0201 Bare Foot Technician (BFT)
3142.9900 Agricultural Technicians, Others `
Family 3143 Forestry Technicians
Group 315 Ship and Aircraft Controllers, and Technicians
Family 3151 Ship’s Engineers
3151.0100 Chief Engineer, Ship 3141.10
3151.0200 Second Engineer, Ship 3141.20
3151.0300 Third Engineer, Ship 3141.30
3151.0400 Fourth Engineer, Ship 3141.40
3151.0500 Fifth Engineer, Ship/Junior Engineer 3141.50
3151.9900 Ship and Aircraft Controllers and Technicians, 3141.90
Other
Family 3152 Ship’s Deck Officers and Pilots
3152.0100 Captain, Ship/Master 3142.10
3152.0200 Chief Officer, Ship 3142.20
3152.0300 Second Officer, Ship 3142.30
3152.0400 Third Officer, Ship 3142.40
3152.0500 Harbour Master 3142.50
3152.0600 Pilot Ship/Bay Pilot/Harbour Pilot/Channel Pilot 3142.60
VOLUME I 99
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3152.0900 Ferry Officer 3142.85
3152.9900 Ship’s Deck Officers and Pilots, Other 3142.90
Family 3153 Aircraft Pilots and Related Associate
Professionals
3153.0100 Chief Pilot, Aircraft 3143.10
3153.0200 Check Pilot 3143.20
3153.0300 Pilot, General 3143.30
3153.0400 Aircraft Pilot, Specialized 3143.40
3153.0500 Pilot, Glider 3143.50
3153.0600 Chief Navigator, Aircraft 3143.60
3153.0700 Check Navigator, Aircraft 3143.65
3153.0800 Navigator, Aircraft 3143.70
3153.0900 Chief Flight Engineer 3143.80
3153.1000 Check Flight Engineer 3143.82
3153.1100 Flight Engineer 3143.84
3153.9900 Aircraft Pilots and Related Associate 3143.90
Professionals, Other
Family 3154 Air Traffic Controllers
3154.0100 Air Traffic Controller Specialist 3144.10
3154.0200 Traffic Controller, Air Service 3144.20
3154.9900 Air Traffic Controllers, Other 3144.90
Family 3155 Air Traffic Safety Electronics Technicians
Sub- 32 Health Associate Professionals
VOLUME I 100
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Division
Group 321 Medical and Pharmaceutical Technicians
Family 3211 Medical Imaging and Therapeutic Equipment
Technicians
3211.0100 X-Ray Technician 3133.10
3211.0101 Radiology Technician
3211.0200 Bio-Medical Equipment Technician 3133.20
3211.0501 Medical Equipment Technician
3211.0801 Cardiac Care Technician
3211.9900 Medical Imaging and Therapeutic Equipment 3133.90
Technicians, Other
Family 3212 Medical and Pathology Laboratory Technicians
3212.0101 Operation Theatre Technician 3211.40
3212.0201 Dialysis Technician 3211.50
3212.0301 Anaesthesia Technician
3212.0501 Histotechnician
3212.0601 Phlebotomy Technician
3212.0602 Blood Bank Technician
3212.0701 Medical Laboratory Technician
3212.9900 Dialysis Technician Life Science Technicians, Other 3211.90
Family 3213 Pharmaceutical Technicians and Assistants
3213.0100 Pharmacist 3228.10
3213.0101 Pharmacy Assistant
VOLUME I 101
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3213.0200 Laboratory Assistant, Pharmaceutical 3228.20
3213.9900 Pharmaceutical Assistants, Other 3228.90
Family 3214 Medical and Dental Prosthetic Technicians
3214.0100 Mechanic, Dental 7311.80
3214.9900 Medical and Dental Prosthetic Technicians, Other
Group 322 Nursing and Midwifery Associate Professionals
Family 3221 Nursing Associate Professionals
3221.0100 Nurse, General 3231.10
3221.0200 Nurse, Industrial 3231.20
3221.0300 Nursing Attendant 3231.30
3221.9900 Nursing Associate Professionals, Other 3231.90
Family 3222 Midwifery Associate Professionals
3222.0100 Midwife 3232.10
3222.0200 Midwifery Attendant 3232.20
3222.0300 Lady Health Visitor/ASHA Worker/Anganwadi 3232.30
Worker
3222.9900 Midwifery Associate Professionals, Other 3232.90
Group 323 Traditional and Complementary Medicine
Associate Professionals
Family 3230 Traditional and Complementary Medicine
Associate Professionals
Group 324 Veterinary Technicians and Assistants
Family 3240 Veterinary Technicians and Assistants
VOLUME I 102
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3240.0100 Vaccinator, Veterinary 3227.10
3240.0200 Stockman 3227.20
3240.0300 Animal Keeper 3227.30
3240.0400 Laboratory Technician, Artificial Breeding 3227.40
3240.9900 Veterinary Technicians and Assistants, Other 3227.90
Group 325 Other Health Associate Professionals
Family 3251 Dental Assistants and Therapists
3251.0101 Dental Assistant 3225.10
3251.9900 Dental Assistants and Therapists, Other 3225.90
Family 3252 Medical Records and Health Information
Technicians
3252.0101 Medical Records and Health Information
Technician
Family 3253 Community Health Workers
3253.0101 Diabetes Educator
3253.0201 Frontline Health Worker
3253.9900 Community Health Workers, Other
Family 3254 Dispensing Opticians
3254.0100 Optician, General 3224.10
3254.0200 Optician, Contact Lens 3224.20
3254.9900 Dispensing Opticians, Other
Family 3255 Physiotherapy Technicians and Assistants
3255.0101 Assistant Physiotherapist
VOLUME I 103
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 3256 Medical Assistants
3256.0101 Refractionist
3256.0202 Vision Technician
3256.9900 Medical Assistants, Other 3221.90
Family 3257 Environmental and Occupational Health
Inspectors and Associates
3257.0100 Sanitary Inspector 3222.10
3257.0300 Environment Science and Protection Technician, 3214.10
Including Health
3257.0400 Environmental Compliance Inspector 3214.20
3257.0500 Environmental Engineering Technician 3214.30
3257.0600 Health, Safety and Environment Officer
3257.9900 Environment Science and Protection Technicians, 3214.90
Other
Family 3258 Ambulance Workers
Family 3259 Modern Health Associate Professionals Not
Elsewhere Classified
Sub- 33 Business and Administration Associate
Division Professionals
Group 331 Financial and Mathematical Associate
Professionals
Family 3311 Securities and Finance Dealers and Brokers
3311.0100 Broker, Share Market 3411.10
3311.0200 Jobber, Share Market 3411.20
VOLUME I 104
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3311.0201 Equity Dealer
3311.0202 Mutual Fund Agent
3311.9900 Securities and Finance Dealers and Brokers, Other 3411.90
Family 3312 Credit and Loan Officers
3312.0100 Finance Agent 3411.50
3312.0101 Loan Approval Officer
3312.9900 Credit and Loan Officers, Other
Family 3313 Accounting Associate Professionals
Family 3314 Statistical, Mathematical and Related Associate
Professionals
3314.0100 Economic Investigator 3433.10
3314.0200 Statistical Assistant 3433.20
3314.9900 Statistical, Mathematical and Related Associate 3433.90
Professionals, Other
Family 3315 Valuers and Loss Assessors
3315.0100 Valuer 3417.40
3315.0200 Claims Inspector, Railways 3417.50
3315.0300 Appraiser, Customs 3417.60
3315.0501 Warranty In-Charge
3315.9900 Valuers and Loss Assessors, Other 3417.90
Group 332 Sales and Purchasing Agents and Brokers
Family 3321 Insurance Representatives
3321.0100 Insurance Agent 3412.10
VOLUME I 105
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3321.0101 Sales Officer (Auto Insurance)
3321.0102 Sales Consultant (Auto Finance)
3321.0200 Insurance Adjuster, Examiner, Surveyor and 3412.20
Investigator
3321.0201 Finance, Insurance and Registration
Co-Ordinator
3321.9900 Insurance Representatives, Other 3412.90
Family 3322 Commercial Sales Representatives
3322.0101 Sales Representative, Technical 3415.10
3322.0200 Commercial Traveller, General 3415.30
3322.0300 Canvasser, Sales 3415.40
3322.0500 Sales Supervisor, Wholesale Trade 3415.60
3322.0601 Key Accounts Sales Manager
3322.0701 Regional Parts Manager
3322.0801 Area Manager (Auto Components)
3322.0802 Sales Officer (Auto Components)
3322.0900 Sales Supervisor, Retail Trade 3415.70
3322.1001 Territory Sales Manager
3322.1002 Territory Sales Manager (Used Vehicles)
3322.1101 Customer Relationship Manager
3322.1102 Regional Manager – Customer Care
3322.1201 Regional Sales Manager (Pre-Owned Vehicles)
VOLUME I 106
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3322.1202 Sales Lead (Pre-Owned Vehicles)
3322.1203 Sales Consultant (Pre-Owned Vehicles)
3322.1301 Sales Manager
3322.1302 Sales Consultant (Institutional
Sales)
3322.1303 Sales Consultant (Retail)
3322.1304 Sales Consultant
3322.1305 Floor Manager
3322.1306 Store Manager
3322.1400 Other Sales Supervisor 3415.80
3322.1501 Regional Sales Manager (RSM)
3322.1601 Regional Dealer Development Manager/Network
Expansion Manager
3322.1701 Marketing Manager – Line of Business
3322.1702 Marketing and Social Media Manager
3322.2101 Regional Retail Finance and Insurance Manager
3322.2501 Service Supervisor
3322.2502 Service Advisor
3322.2503 Service Office Manager
3322.2504 Service Office Executive
3322.4001 Pre-Delivery Inspection In-Charge
3322.4002 Pre-Delivery Inspection Supervisor
VOLUME I 107
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3322.5001 Plumbing Products Sales Officer
3322.5002 Plumber Aftersales Service
3322.6001 Export Executive
3322.6011 Export Assistant
3322.9900 Commercial Sales Representatives, Other 3415.90
Family 3323 Buyers
3323.0100 Buyer 3416.10
3323.0101 Merchandiser – Gem & Jewellery
3323.0102 Merchandiser – Apparel
3323.0200 Purchasing Agent 3416.20
3323.0301 Vendor Development Executive
3323.0401 Purchase Executive
3323.0501 Purchase Executive – Solar
3323.0601 Associate – Supply Chain Management
3323.0602 Supply Chain Field Assistant
3323.9900 Buyers, Other 3416.90
Family 3324 Trade Brokers
Group 333 Business Service Agents
Family 3331 Clearing and Forwarding Agents
Family 3332 Conference and Event Planners
Family 3333 Employment Agents and Contractors
Family 3334 Real Estate Agents and Property Managers
VOLUME I 108
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3334.0100 Property Dealer 3413.10
3334.0200 House Agent 3413.20
3334.9900 Estate Agents, Other 3413.90
Family 3339 Business Service Agents Not Elsewhere Classified
3339.0200 Brand Manager 2419.50
3339.0300 Auctioneer 3417.10
3339.0400 Crier, Auction 3417.20
3339.0500 Conductor, Auction Sale 3417.30
3339.0601 Delivery Management Cell Agent 3429.10
Group 334 Administrative and Specialized Secretaries
Family 3341 Office Supervisors
3341.0200 Overseer, Postmen 4142.10
3341.0400 Supervisor, Telephone 4142.20
3341.0500 Monitor, Telephone 4142.25
3341.0600 Supervisor, Wireless 4142.30
3341.0700 Headlight Keeper 4142.35
3341.0800 Section Officer 3431.10
3341.0900 Inspectors and Supervisors, Other (Clerical) 3431.20
3341.1000 Office Assistant 3431.30
3341.1100 Briefing Assistant 3431.40
3341.1200 Sub-Post Master 3439.10
3341.9900 Office Supervisors, Other 3439.90
VOLUME I 109
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 3342 Legal Secretaries
Family 3343 Administrative and Executive Secretaries
Family 3344 Medical Secretaries
Group 335 Government Regulatory Associate Professionals
Family 3351 Customs and Border Inspectors
3351.0100 Inspector, Customs 3441.10
3351.0200 Supervisor, Customs 3441.20
3351.0300 Searcher 3441.30
3351.9900 Customs and Border Inspectors, Other 3441.90
Family 3352 Government Tax and Excise Officials
3352.0100 Inspector, Excise 3442.10
3352.9900 Government Tax and Excise Officials, Other 3442.90
Family 3353 Government Social Benefits Officials
3353.0100 Village Level Worker 3443.10
3353.0200 Patroller, Women 3443.20
3353.9900 Government Social Benefits Officials, Other 3443.90
Family 3354 Government Licensing Officials
Family 3355 Police Inspectors and Detectives
3355.0100 Inspector, Police 3450.10
3355.0200 Sub-Inspector, Police 3450.20
3355.0300 Detective 3450.30
3355.9900 Police Inspectors and Detectives, Other 3450.90
VOLUME I 110
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 3359 Government Regulatory Associate Professionals
Not Elsewhere Classified
Sub- 34 Legal, Social, Cultural and Related Associate
Division Professionals
Group 341 Legal, Social and Religious Associate
Professionals
Family 3411 Legal and Related Associate Professionals
3411.0100 Legal Assistant 3432.10
3411.0200 Shirestedar 3432.20
3411.0300 Petition Writer 3432.30
3411.9900 Legal and Related Associate Professionals, Other 3432.90
Family 3412 Social Work Associate Professionals
3412.0100 Blood Donor Unit Assistant 3460.10
3412.0200 Equal Opportunity Officer 3460.20
3412.9900 Social Work Associate Professionals 3460.90
Family 3413 Religious Associate Professionals
Group 342 Sports and Fitness Workers
Family 3421 Athletes and Sports Players
3421.0100 Professional Sportsman/Professional, Athlete 3475.20
3421.0200 Jockey 3475.30
Family 3422 Sports Coaches, Instructors and Officials
3422.0100 Athletic Coach 3475.40
3422.0201 Sports Coach 3475.45
VOLUME I 111
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3422.0300 Riding Instructor 3475.50
3422.0400 Umpire 3475.60
3422.0500 Marker/Groundsmen & Women 3475.70
3422.9900 Sports Coaches, Instructors and Officials, Other 3475.90
Family 3423 Fitness and Recreation Instructors, and
Programme Leaders
3423.0101 Fitness Trainer/Fitness Instructor
3423.0200 Physical Training Instructor/Physical Education 3475.15
Teacher
3423.0501 Lifeguard
3423.9900 Fitness and Recreation Instructors and
Programme Leaders
Group 343 Administrative Associate Professionals
Family 3431 Photographers
3431.0100 Photographer, General 3131.25
3431.0200 Photographer News 3131.30
3431.0300 Photographer, Aerial 3131.35
3431.9900 Photographers, Other 3131.90
Family 3432 Interior Designers
3432.0100 Interior Designer 3471.50
3432.0200 Decorator 3471.10
3432.0501 Bathroom and Kitchen Designer
3432.9900 Decorators and Commercial Designers, Other 3471.90
VOLUME I 112
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 3433 Gallery, Museum and Library Technicians
Family 3434 Chefs
3434.0100 Head Cook/Head Chef 5122.10
Family 3435 Other Artistic and Cultural Associate
Professionals
3435.0100 Tattoo Artist 3471.30
3435.0200 Stuntman 3474.25
3435.0300 Prompter 3474.47
3435.0400 Merry-Go-Round Operator 3474.80
3435.0500 Floral Designer 3471.60
3435.9900 Other Artistic and Cultural Associate 3474.90
Professionals, Other
Sub- 35 Information and Communications Technicians
Division
Group 351 Information and Communication Technology
Operations and User Support Technicians
Family 3511 Information and Communication Technology
Operations Technicians
3511.0101 Domestic Biometric Data Operator
Family 3512 Information and Communication Technology
User Support Technicians
3512.0100 Data Recovery Planner/System Administrator 3121.35
3512.0101 Domestic IT Helpdesk Attendant
3512.0200 Desktop Publishing Operator 3121.50
VOLUME I 113
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3512.0202 Associate— Desktop Publishing (DTP)
3514.0300 Programming Assistant/Junior Software Engineer 3121.20
3512.0401 Disk Duplicator
3512.0501 IT Co-Ordinator in School
3512.0601 Associate – Clinical Data Management
3512.0700 Medical Transcriptionist 3121.40
3512.0702 Associate – Medical Transcription
3512.0801 Engineer – Technical Support
3512.9900 Information and Communication Technology User 3121.90
Support Technicians, Other
Family 3513 Computer Network and Systems Technician
3513.0100 System Administration Assistant/Junior System 3121.10
Administrator
3513.0200 Computer Security Specialist 3121.30
3513.0301 Infrastructure Engineer
3513.9900 Computer Network and Systems Technician,
Other
Family 3514 Web Technician
Group 352 Telecommunication and Broadcasting
Technicians
Family 3521 Broadcasting and Audiovisual Technicians
3521.0100 Cinematographer 3131.10
3521.0200 Movie Cameraman 3131.15
VOLUME I 114
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3521.0300 Cameraman, Animation 3131.20
3521.0401 Sound Recording Equipment Operator/Sound 3131.40
Assistant
3521.0501 Film Editor/Editor 3131.50
3521.0511 Sound Editor
3521.0600 Supervisor, Broadcasting Audiovisual Projection 3132.10
and Sound Equipment Operations
3521.0700 Television Broadcasting Station Operator 3132.20
3521.0800 Radio Operator, Broadcasting Station 3132.30
3521.0900 Cinematograph Operator 3132.40
3521.1000 Public Address Equipment Operator 3132.50
3521.1100 Station Officer, Overseas Communication 3132.55
3521.1200 Station Technical Assistant, Overseas 3132.60
Communication
3521.1300 Wireless Operator 3132.65
3521.1400 Radio Operator, Ship 3132.70
3521.1500 Radio Operator, Aircraft 3132.75
3521.1600 Control Tower Operator, Aerodrome 3132.76
3521.1700 Radar Operator 3132.80
3521.2000 Signaller, Ship 3132.83
3521.2100 Light Keeper, Light House 3132.84
3521.9900 Broadcasting and Audiovisual Technicians, Other 3132.90
Family 3522 Telecommunication Engineering Technicians
VOLUME I 115
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
3522.0100 Telecommunication, Technician 3114.20
3522.0200 Line Inspector, Telephone 3114.30
3522.0300 Telephone Inspector 3114.40
3522.0400 Wireless Inspector Electronics 3114.50
3522.9900 Telecommunication Engineering Technicians,
Other
VOLUME I 116
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Division 4 Clerks/Clerical Support Workers
Sub- 41 General and Keyboard Clerks
Division
Group 411 General Office Clerks
Family 4110 General Office Clerks
4110.0100 Clerk, General 4190.10
4110.0200 Clerk, Enquiry 4190.20
4110.0300 Copyright Clerk 4190.30
4110.0400 Copy Holder 4190.35
4110.0500 Timekeeper 4190.60
4110.0600 Timekeeper, Motor Transport 4190.70
Group 412 Secretaries (General)
Family 4120 Secretaries (General)
4120.0100 Private Secretary 4115.10
4120.0200 Personal Secretary 4115.20
4120.0300 Panchayat Secretary 4115.30
4120.9900 Secretaries, Other 4115.90
Group 413 Keyboard Operators
Family 4131 Typists and Word Processing Operators
4131.0100 Secretary/Back Office Support 4111.10
4131.0200 Reporter 4111.20
4131.0400 Braille Typist 4111.40
VOLUME I 117
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
4131.0500 Teleprinter Operator 4112.10
4131.0600 Computer Operator 4112.20
4131.9900 Typists and Word Processing Operators, 4112.90
Other
Family 4132 Data Entry Clerks
4132.0401 Data Entry Machine Operator 4113.35
4132.0402 Domestic Data Entry Operator
4132.0600 Coding Machine Operator 4113.50
4132.0800 Duplicating Machine Operator/Photocopier 4113.65
4132.0900 Embossing Machine Operator 4113.70
4132.1000 Addressing Machine Operator 4113.80
4132.1300 Bookkeeping Machine Operator 4114.30
4132.1400 Bill Processing Clerk 4114.40
4132.9900 Data Entry Clerks, Other 4114.90
Sub- 42 Customer Services Clerks
Division
Group 421 Tellers, Money Collectors and Related
Clerks
Family 4211 Bank Tellers and Related Clerks
4211.0100 Cashier, General 4211.10
4211.0200 Cashier, Bank 4211.20
4211.0301 Cashier, Cash Counter 4211.30
4211.0302 Cashier, Gem & Jewellery
VOLUME I 118
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
4211.0400 Teller, Bank 4212.10
4211.9900 Bank Tellers and Related Clerks, Other 4212.90
Family 4212 Bookmakers, Croupiers and Related
Gaming Workers
4212.0100 Booking Clerk, Recreation 4211.60
4212.0200 Bookmaker 4213.10
4212.9900 Bookmakers, Croupiers and Related Gaming 4213.90
Workers, Other
Family 4213 Pawnbrokers and Moneylenders
4213.0100 Moneylender 4214.10
4213.0200 Pawn Broker 4214.20
4213.9900 Pawnbrokers and Moneylenders, Other 4214.90
Family 4214 Debt Collectors and Related Workers
4214.0100 Bill Collector 4215.10
4214.0201 Debt Recovery Agents
4214.9900 Debt Collectors and Related Workers, Other 4215.90
Group 422 Client Information Workers
Family 4221 Travel Consultants and Clerks
4221.0100 Travel Consultants & Organizers
4221.0200 Flight Attendants and Travel Stewards
4221.0300 Reservation Clerk, Transport/Reservation 4211.40
Assistant
4221.0400 Booking Clerk, Transport/Concierge 4211.50
VOLUME I 119
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
4221.9900 Travel Consultants and Clerks, Others 4211.90
Family 4222 Contact Centre Information Clerks
4222.0101 Technical Support Executive – Non-Voice
4222.0102 Technical Support Executive – Voice
Family 4223 Telephone Switchboard Operators
4223.0100 Telephone Operator, Trunk 4222.10
4223.0200 Telephone Operator, Local 4222.20
4223.0300 Telephone Operator, PBX 4222.30
4223.9900 Telephone Switchboard Operators, Other 4222.90
Family 4224 Hotel Receptionists
4224.0100 Receptionist (Hotel)/Front Office Associate 4221.10
4224.9900 Hotel Receptionists, Other
Family 4225 Inquiry Clerks
4225.0100 Complaint Attending Clerk/Customer Service 4221.30
Desk/Customer Service Executive
4225.9900 Inquiry Clerks, Other 4221.90
Family 4226 Receptionist (General)
4226.0100 Reception Clerk/Front Desk 4221.20
Executive/Receptionist
4226.0201 Showroom Hostess/Host
Family 4227 Survey and Market Research Interviewers
Family 4229 Client Information Worker Not Elsewhere
Classified
VOLUME I 120
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Sub- 43 Numerical and Material Recording Clerks
Division
Group 431 Numerical Clerks
Family 4311 Accounting and Bookkeeping Clerks
4311.0101 Bookkeeper General/Accounts Executive 4121.10
(Recording and Reporting)
4311.0200 Bank Clerk 4121.30
4311.0300 Ledger Clerk 4121.40
4311.0401 Accounts Executive (Accounts Payable &
Receivable)
4311.0500 Audit, Clerk 4121.50
4311.0600 Clerk, Cost Accounting 4121.60
4311.0700 Bill and Accounts Collector 4121.70
4311.0801 Rubber Nursery Office Assistant
4311.9900 Accounting and Bookkeeping Clerks, Others 4121.90
Family 4312 Statistical Finance and Insurance Clerks
4312.0100 Statistical Clerks 4122.10
4312.9900 Statistical Finance and Insurance Clerks, 4122.90
Others
Family 4313 Payroll Clerks
4313.0101 Accounts Clerk/Accounts Executive (Payroll) 4121.20
4313.0201 Accounts Executive (Statutory Compliance)
Group 432 Material Recording and Transport Clerks
Family 4321 Stock Clerks
VOLUME I 121
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
4321.0100 Store Keeper 4131.10
4321.0101 Spare Parts Operations Executive
4321.0102 Inventory Clerk
4321.0103 Inventory Manager
4321.0104 Storage Assistant
4321.0200 Store Distributor 4131.20
4321.0301 Stock Verifier 4131.30
4321.0302 Incoming Inspection Technician
4321.0401 Manager Stores Operation
4321.0402 Spare Parts Operations In-Charge
4321.0501 Store Ops Assistant
4321.0601 Warehouse Picker
4321.0602 Warehouse Binner
4321.0603 Warehouse Packer
4321.0604 Kitting and Labelling Executive
4321.0701 Warranty Processor
4321.9900 Stock Clerks, Other 4131.90
Family 4322 Production Clerks
4322.0101 Inventory Manager (Wholesale)
4322.0201 Junior Rubber Technician/Technical
Assistant
Family 4323 Transport Clerks
VOLUME I 122
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
4323.0100 Yard Master, Railway 4133.10
4323.0200 Head Train Recorder 4133.20
4323.0300 Traffic Regulator, Tram 4133.27
4323.0400 Controller, Tram 4133.30
4323.0500 Traffic Timetable Inspector, Tram 4133.40
4323.9900 Transport Clerks, Other 4133.90
Sub- 44 Other Clerical Support Workers
Division
Group 441 Other Clerical Support Workers
Family 4411 Library Clerks
4411.0100 Library Clerk 4141.10
4411.0200 Braille and Talking Books Clerk 4141.20
4411.0300 Preservation Assistant, Archives 4141.30
4411.9900 Library Clerks, Other 4141.90
Family 4412 Mail Carriers and Sorting Clerks
4412.0100 Mail Guard 4142.40
4412.0200 Postman 4142.45
4412.0300 Village Postman 4142.47
4412.9900 Mail Carriers and Sorting Clerks, Other 4142.90
Family 4413 Coding, Proofreading and Related Clerks
4413.0100 Coding Clerk 4143.10
4413.0200 Proofreader 4143.20
VOLUME I 123
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
4413.9900 Coding, Proofreading and Related Clerks, 4143.90
Others
Family 4414 Scribes and Related Clerks
4414.0100 Braille Transcriber, Hand 4144.10
4414.9900 Scribes and Related Clerks, Other 4144.90
Family 4415 Filing and Copying Clerks
Family 4416 Personnel Clerks
4416.0101 Associate – HRO
Family 4419 Clerical Support Workers Not Elsewhere
Classified
4419.0100 Publicity Assistant 4190.25
4419.0102 Business Correspondent
4419.0200 Patwari 4190.40
4419.0300 Patrol, Irrigation 4190.50
4419.0400 Bailiff 4190.55
4419.0500 Office Boy/Peon 4190.80
4419.0600 Daftry 5132.10
4419.0800 Process Server 5132.30
4419.9900 Clerical Support Workers, Other 5132.90
VOLUME I 124
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Division 5 Service and Sales Workers
Sub- 51 Personal Service Workers
Division
Group 511 Travel Attendants, Conductors and Guides
Family 5111 Travel Attendants and Travel Stewards
5111.0100 Chief Steward, Ship/Chief Cook 5111.10
5111.0200 Steward, Ship/Mess Man 5111.20
5111.0300 Air Hostess 5111.30
5111.0400 Flight Steward 5111.40
5111.0500 Aircraft Cargo Handling Supervisor 5111.50
5111.0600 Air Crew Member 5111.60
5111.9900 Travel Attendants and Travel Stewards, 5111.90
Other
Family 5112 Transport Conductors
5112.0100 Guard, Passenger Train 5112.10
5112.0200 Guard, Goods Train 5112.20
5112.0300 Brakesman, Railway 5112.30
5112.0400 Conductor Guard, Railway 5112.40
5112.0500 Ticket Collector, Railway 5112.42
5112.0600 Travelling Ticket Examiner, Railway 5112.44
5112.0700 Ticket Examiner, Motor Transport 5112.46
5112.0800 Passenger Guide, Railway 5112.50
5112.0900 Conductor, Tram 5112.60
VOLUME I 125
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
5112.1000 Bus Conductor 5112.70
5112.9900 Transport Conductors, Other 5112.90
Family 5113 Travel Guides
5113.0100 Travel Agent 5113.10
5113.0200 Tourist Guide 5113.20
5113.9900 Guides, Other 5113.90
Group 512 Cooks
Family 5120 Cooks
5120.0200 Cook, Institutional 5122.20
5120.0300 Cook, Domestic 5122.30
5120.0400 Cook, Ship 5122.40
5120.0500 Kitchen Porter/Steward 5122.50
5120.0600 Pantry Man 5122.60
5120.9900 Cooks, Other 5122.90
Group 513 Waiters and Bartenders
Family 5131 Waiters
5131.0100 Butler 5123.10
5131.0200 Steward, Hotel 5123.20
5131.0300 Bearer, Domestic/Household Workers 5123.30
5131.0401 Waiter, Institutional/Food & Beverage 5123.40
Service –Steward
5131.0500 Wine Waiter 5123.50
VOLUME I 126
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
5131.9900 Waiters, Other 5123.90
Family 5132 Bartenders
5132.0100 Barman 5123.60
5132.9900 Bartenders, Other
Group 514 Hairdressers, Beauticians and Related
Workers
Family 5141 Hairdressers
5141.0100 Hairdresser (Ladies) 5141.10
5141.0202 Hair Stylist 5141.15
5141.0201 Assistant Hair Stylist
5141.0300 Barber 5141.20
5141.9900 Hairdressers, Other
Family 5142 Beauticians and Related Workers
5142.0100 Beautician 5141.30
5142.0101 Assistant Beautician
5142.0200 Manicurist 5141.40
5142.0201 Pedicurist and Manicurist
5142.0300 Skincare Specialist 5141.45
5142.0400 Make-Up Man 5141.50
5142.0500 Dresser, Stage & Studio 5141.60
5142.0600 Wigman 5141.70
5142.0700 Bath Attendant 5141.80
VOLUME I 127
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
5142.9900 Beauticians and Related Workers, Others 5141.90
Group 515 Building and Housekeeping Supervisors
Family 5151 Cleaning and Housekeeping Supervisors in
Offices, Hotels and Other Establishments
5151.0101 Housekeeper (Institutional)/Housekeeping 5121.10
Supervisor
5151.0201 Janitor/Housekeeping Attendant 5121.15
5151.0202 Room Attendant
5151.0300 House Stewards/Domestic Help 5121.30
5151.0400 Matron, Housekeeping 5121.35
5151.0500 Linen Keeper 5121.50
5151.0600 Hotel and Restaurant Keeper/Hotel and 5121.60
Restaurant Owner
5151.0701 Supervisor, Front Office/Customer Service 5121.25
Executive (Meet and Greet)
5151.0800 Room Bearer/Bell Boys/Bell Hop/Hotel 5121.70
Porters
5151.9900 Cleaning and Housekeeping Supervisors in 5121.90
Offices, Hotels and Other Establishments,
Other
Family 5152 Domestic Housekeepers
5152.0100 Housekeeper (Domestic) 5121.20
5152.9900 Domestic Housekeepers, Others
Family 5153 Building Caretakers
5153.0100 Caretaker, Building 9141.10
VOLUME I 128
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
5153.0200 Caretaker, Monument 9141.20
5153.0300 Caretaker, Burial Places and Cremation 9141.30
Grounds
5153.9900 Building Caretakers, Other 9141.90
Group 516 Other Personal Services Workers
Family 5161 Astrologers, Fortune Tellers and Related
Workers
5161.0100 Astrologer 5151.10
5161.0200 Palmist 5152.10
5161.9900 Astrologers, Fortune Tellers and Related 5152.90
Workers, Other
Family 5162 Companions and Valets
Family 5163 Undertakers and Embalmers
5163.0100 Undertaker 5143.10
5163.0200 Embalmer 5143.20
5163.0300 Grave Digger 5143.30
5163.9900 Undertakers and Embalmers, Other 5143.90
Family 5164 Pet Groomers and Animal Care Workers
Family 5165 Driving Instructors
5165.0101 Commercial Vehicle Driver Trainer
Family 5169 Personal Service Workers Not Elsewhere
Classified
Sub- 52 Sales Workers
Division
VOLUME I 129
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Group 521 Street and Market Salespersons
Family 5211 Stall and Market Salespersons
5211.0100 Advertising Sales Agent/Advertising 5230.10
Executive
5211.0200 Shop Attendant/Sales Assistant 5230.20
5211.0300 Telemarketing Sales Person/Telemarketing 5230.30
Sales Operator
5211.0301 Sales Executive – Dealership
5211.0302 Telecaller
5211.9900 Stall and Market Salespersons, Other 5230.90
Family 5212 Street Food Salespersons
5212.0100 Milkman 9111.10
5212.9900 Street Food Vendors, Other/Khomchawala, 9111.90
Dhabawala, Chat Thelawala
Group 522 Shop Salespersons
Family 5221 Shopkeepers
Family 5222 Shop Supervisors
5222.0100 Sales Supervisor, Wholesale Trade 5220.10
5222.0101 Area Parts Manager (APM)
5222.0201 Sales Supervisor, Retail Trade/CRM 5220.15
Manager
Family 5223 Shop Sales Assistants
5223.0100 Shop Assistant 5220.40
5223.0101 Order Processor
VOLUME I 130
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
5223.0102 Jewellery Retail Sales Associate (Basic)
5223.0103 Jewellery Retail Sales Associate (Advanced)
5223.0104 Plumbing Products Sales Assistant
5223.0105 Trainee Associate
Group 523 Cashiers and Ticket Clerks
Family 5230 Cashiers and Ticket Clerks
Group 524 Other Sales Workers
Family 5241 Fashion and Other Models
5241.0100 Model, Fashion 5210.10
5241.0200 Model 5210.20
5241.9900 Fashion and Models, Other 5210.90
Family 5242 Sales Demonstrators
5242.0101 Technical Demonstrator (Sale)/Area 5220.25
Technical Lead
5242.0102 Sales Associate
5242.0201 Customer Care Executive (Relationship
Centre)
5242.0301 Customer Care Executive (Repair Centre)
5242.0401 In-Store Promoter
5242.0501 Associate Network Engineer 5220.20
5242.0502 Associate Operations Engineer
5242.9900 Sales Demonstrators, Other 5220.90
Family 5243 Door-to-Door Salespersons
VOLUME I 131
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
5243.0100 Newspaper Boy 9113.10
5243.0200 Order Supplier/Supplier 9113.20
5243.0300 Home Deliveryman 9113.30
5243.0401 Distributor Sales Representative
5243.0501 Field Sales Executive (FSE)
5243.0502 Sales Executive (Broadband)
5243.9900 Door-to-Door and Telephone Sales Persons, 9113.90
Other
Family 5244 Contact Centre Salespersons
5244.0100 Operator, Call Centre 5220.22
5244.0101 CRM Domestic Voice
5244.0102 Associate – CRM
5244.0103 Customer Relation Executive
5244.0201 CRM Domestic Non-Voice
5244.0202 Associate Customer Care (Non-Voice)
5244.0203 Collections Executive
5244.0301 Customer Care Executive
5244.0302 Remote Helpdesk Technician
5244.0303 Customer Care Executive (Call Centre)
Family 5245 Service Station Attendants
5245.0101 Petrol Pump Salesman/Fuel 5220.45
Serviceman/Fuel Dispensing Attendant
Family 5246 Food Service Counter Attendants
VOLUME I 132
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 5249 Sales Workers Not Elsewhere Classified
5249.0101 Key Account Service Manager
5249.0200 Salesman, Wholesale Trade 5220.30
5249.0201 Commercial Manager (Zonal/Regional)
5249.0202 Commercial Executive/Officer
5249.0301 Salesman, Retail Trade 5220.35
5249.0400 Wholesale Dealer 5220.50
5249.0500 Retail Dealer 5220.55
5249.0600 Selling Agent 5220.60
5249.0700 Stockist 5220.65
Sub- 53 Personal Care Workers
Division
Group 531 Child Care Workers and Teachers' Aides
Family 5311 Child Care Workers
5311.0100 Ayah, Institutional 5131.10
5311.0200 Child Care Worker 5131.30
5311.0300 Governess 5121.40
5311.0400 Ayah, Domestic 5131.20
5311.9900 Child Care Workers, Other 5131.90
Family 5312 Teachers' Aides
Group 532 Personal Care Workers in Health Services
Family 5321 Healthcare Assistants
VOLUME I 133
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 5322 Home-Based Personal Care Workers
5322.0101 Home Health Aide
5322.9900 Home-Based Personal Care Workers, Other 5133.90
Family 5329 Personal Care Workers in Health Services
Not Elsewhere Classified
5329.0101 General Duty Assistant
Sub- 54 Protective Service Workers
Division
Group 541 Protective Service Workers
Family 5411 Fire Fighters
5411.0100 Fire Fighter 5161.10
5411.9900 Fire Fighters, Other 5161.90
Family 5412 Police Officers
5412.0100 Police Constable 5162.10
5412.0200 Sepoy, Customs 5162.20
5412.0300 Constable, Excise 5162.30
5412.9900 Police Officers, Other 5162.90
Family 5413 Prison Guards
5413.0100 Warder, Jail 5163.10
5413.9900 Prison Guards, Other 5163.90
Family 5414 Security Guards
5414.0101 Security Officer 5169.10
5414.0102 Assignment Manager
VOLUME I 134
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
5414.0111 Security Supervisor
5414.0121 CCTV Supervisor
5414.0151 Armed Security Guard
5414.0171 Personal Security Officer
5414.0200 Home Guard 5169.20
5414.0400 Watchman 9152.20
5414.0501 Gateman/Unarmed Security Guard 9152.30
Family 5419 Protective Services Workers Not Elsewhere
Classified
VOLUME I 135
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Division 6 Skilled Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery
Workers
Sub- 61 Market-Oriented Skilled Agricultural
Division Workers
Group 611 Market Gardeners & Crop Growers
Family 6111 Field Crop and Vegetable Growers
6111.0100 Cultivator, General 6111.10
6111.0101 Paddy Farmer
6111.0200 Cultivator, Crop 6111.20
6111.0201 Wheat Cultivator
6111.0301 Maize Cultivator
6111.0401 Pulses Cultivator
6111.0501 Soybean Cultivator
6111.0601 Cotton Cultivator
6111.0701 Sugarcane Cultivator
6111.0800 Cultivator, Fruit 6112.10
6111.0851 Coconut Grower
6111.0852 Friends of Coconut Tree
6111.0901 Banana Farmer
6111.1001 Mango Grower
6111.1101 Citrus Fruit Grower
6111.1200 Viniculturist 6112.20
6111.1300 Cultivator, Vegetables 6111.30
VOLUME I 136
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
6111.1401 Bulb Crop Cultivator
6111.1501 Solanaceous Crop Cultivator
6111.1601 Tuber Crop Cultivator
6111.1801 Chillies Cultivator
6111.1901 Coriander Cultivator
6111.2000 Fieldman, Agriculture 6111.50
6111.9900 Field Crop and Vegetable Growers, Other 6111.90
Family 6112 Tree and Shrub Crop Growers
6112.0100 Pruner, Tea Gardens 6112.30
6112.0200 Tapper, Palm Juice 6112.40
6112.0201 Neera Technician
6112.0300 Tapper, Rubber 6112.50
6112.0400 Budder 6112.65
6112.0501 Tea Plantation Worker
6112.0601 Coffee Plantation Worker
6112.0701 Bamboo Grower
6112.0801 Rubber Nursery Worker – Budder
6112.0802 Rubber Nursery Worker – General
6112.9900 Tree and Shrub Crop Growers, Other 6112.90
Family 6113 Gardeners, Horticultural and Nursery
Growers
6113.0100 Planter 6113.10
VOLUME I 137
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
6113.0200 Nurseryman 6113.20
6113.0301 Gardener, General 6113.30
6113.0400 Groundsman 6113.40
6113.0501 Greenhouse Fitter
6113.0601 Floriculturist – (Open Cultivation)
6113.0602 Floriculturist – (Protected Cultivation)
6113.9900 Nursery Workers and Gardeners, Other 6113.90
Family 6114 Mixed Crop Growers
6114.9900 Mixed Crop Growers, Other 6114.90
Family 6115 Medicinal and Aromatic Plant Cultivators
Family 6116 Agriculture Information Management
6116.0101 Agriculture Extension Executive
6116.0102 Agriculture Extension Service Provider
6116.0112 Community Service Provider
Group 612 Animal Producers
Family 6121 Livestock and Dairy Producers
6121.0100 Farmer, Livestock 6121.10
6121.0201 Farmer, Dairy/Dairy Farmer/Entrepreneur 6121.15
6121.0300 Livestock Worker, General 6121.20
6121.0400 Herdsman 6121.25
6121.0500 Livestock Workers/Other Livestock Workers 6121.30
6121.0601 Dairy Farm Worker, General/Dairy Worker 6121.35
VOLUME I 138
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
6121.0700 Milker 6121.40
6121.0800 Milker, Machine 6121.45
6121.1000 Stableman 6121.55
6121.1100 Elephant Keeper 6121.60
6121.1200 Shearer, Sheep 6121.65
6121.1300 Shearer, Animal, Other/Shearer, Other 6121.70
Animals
6121.1400 Grass Cutter 6121.75
6121.9900 Dairy and Livestock Producers, Other 6121.90
Family 6122 Poultry Producers
6122.0101 Farmer, Poultry/Broiler Farm Supervisor 6122.10
6122.0200 Farmer, Poultry Breeding 6122.20
6122.0301 Poultry Farm Worker, General/Broiler Farm 6122.30
Worker
6122.0401 Hatchery Operator/Hatchery In-Charge 6122.40
6122.9900 Poultry Farm Workers, Other 6122.90
Family 6123 Apiarists and Sericulturists
6123.0101 Beekeeper 6123.10
6123.0201 Rearer, Silkworm/ Sericulturist 6123.20
6123.9900 Apiarists and Sericulturists, Other 6123.90
Family 6129 Animal Producers Not Elsewhere Classified
6129.0100 Farmer, Fur-Bearing Animals 6129.10
6129.0200 Mixed Animal Producers 6124
VOLUME I 139
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
6129.9900 Animal Producers and Related Workers, 6129.90
Other
Group 613 Mixed Crop and Animal Workers
Family 6130 Mixed Crop and Animal Workers
6130.0100 Artificial Breeding Technician 6130.10
6130.0201 Seed Grower/Quality Seed Grower 6112.60
6130.0202 Seed Processing Worker
6130.9900 Mixed Crop and Animal Workers, Other 6130.90
Sub- 62 Market-Oriented Skilled Forestry, Fishery
Division and Hunting Workers
Group 621 Forestry and Related Workers
Family 6210 Forestry and Related Workers
6210.0100 Forester 6141.10
6210.0200 Forest Guard 6141.15
6210.0300 Forest Fire Watcher 6141.20
6210.0400 Foresters and Related Workers 6141.25
6210.0500 Gatherer Lac 6141.30
6210.0600 Gatherer, Medicinal Herbs 6141.35
6210.0700 Gatherer, Firewood 6141.40
6210.0800 Cane Cutter 6141.45
6210.0900 Thatch Cutter 6141.50
6210.1000 Log Feller 6141.55
6210.1100 Wood Cutter 6141.60
VOLUME I 140
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
6210.1200 Marker, Log 6141.65
6210.1300 Sandalwood Extractor 6141.70
6210.1400 Estimator, Timber 6141.75
6210.1500 Sorter, Timber 6141.80
6210.1600 Log Driver 6141.85
6210.1700 Charcoal Burner, Wood 6142.10
6210.1800 Digester Operator, Wood 6142.20
6210.1900 Distiller, Turpentine and Eucalyptus 6142.30
6210.2000 Lac Treater 6142.40
6210.9900 Forestry and Related Workers, Other 6141.90
Group 622 Fishery Workers, Hunters and Trappers
Family 6221 Aquaculture Workers
6221.0101 Shrimp Farmer
6221.0102 Hatchery Production Worker
Family 6222 Inland and Coastal Waters Fishery Workers
6222.0100 Fisherman, Inland Water 6152.10
6222.0200 Fisherman, Estuaries, Coastal and 6152.20
Backwater
6222.9900 Inland and Coastal Water Fishery Workers, 6152.90
Other
Family 6223 Deep Sea Fishery Workers
6223.0101 Fisherman, Deep Sea/Marine Capture 6153.10
Fisherman
VOLUME I 141
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
6223.9900 Deep Sea Fishery Workers, Other 6153.90
Family 6224 Hunters and Trappers
6224.0300 Trapper 6154.30
6224.0400 Tracker 6154.40
6224.0500 Fish Overseer 6159.10
6224.0600 Fisheries Inspector 6159.20
6224.0700 Fieldman, Fish 6159.25
6224.0800 Yard Officer 6159.30
6224.0900 Fish Hatcher 6159.35
6224.1000 Fish Curer 6159.40
6224.1100 Fish Meal Maker 6159.45
6224.1200 Rock Pilot 6159.50
6224.1300 Man Duck 6159.55
6224.1400 Net Maker 6159.60
6224.9900 Hunters and Trappers, Other 6159.90
Sub- 63 Subsistence Farmers, Fishers, Hunters and
Division Gatherers
Group 631 Subsistence Crop Farmers
Family 6310 Subsistence Crop Farmers
6310.0100 Tree Trimmer and Pruner 6200.10
6310.9900 Subsistence Crop Farmers, Others 6200.90
Group 632 Subsistence Livestock Farmers
VOLUME I 142
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 6320 Subsistence Livestock Farmers
Group 633 Subsistence Mixed Crop and Livestock
Farmers
Family 6330 Subsistence Mixed Crop and Livestock
Farmers
Group 634 Subsistence Fishers, Hunters, Trappers and
Gatherers
Family 6340 Subsistence Fishers, Hunters, Trappers and
Gatherers
VOLUME I 143
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Division 7 Craft and Related Trades Workers
Sub- 71 Building and Related Trade Workers
Division (Excluding Electricians)
Group 711 Building Frames and Related Trades
Workers
Family 7111 House Builders
7111.0100 Hut Maker 7121.10
7111.0200 Thatcher 7121.20
7111.9900 Builders, Traditional Materials, Other 7121.90
Family 7112 Bricklayers and Related Workers
7112.0100 Stone Mason 7122.10
7112.0200 Bricklayerer, Construction 7122.20
7112.0201 Plumbing Mason
7112.0300 Bricklayer, Refractory 7122.30
7112.0400 Paviour 7122.40
7112.0500 Tar Supervisor 7122.50
7112.0601 Assistant Mason
7112.9900 Bricklayerers, Other 7122.90
Family 7113 Stonemasons, Stone Cutters, Splitters and
Carvers
7113.0200 Stone Cutter, Hand 7113.20
7113.0300 Stone Dresser, Hand 7113.30
7113.0400 Stone Carver 7113.40
VOLUME I 144
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7113.0500 Stone Polisher, Hand 7113.50
7113.9900 Stone Splitters, Cutters and Carvers, Other 7113.90
Family 7114 Concrete Placers, Concrete Finishers and
Related Workers
7114.0100 Concrete Moulder 7123.10
7114.0200 Cement Finisher 7123.20
7114.9900 Concrete Placers, Concrete Finishers and 7123.90
Related Workers, Other
Family 7115 Carpenters and Joiners
7115.0100 Carpenter, General 7124.10
7115.0200 Carpenter, Construction 7124.20
7115.0201 Assistant Shuttering Carpenter
7115.0300 Carpenter, Structural 7124.25
7115.0400 Carpenter, Village 7124.30
7115.0500 Joiner, Wood 7124.35
7115.0600 Loftsman, Ship Building 7124.40
7115.0700 Shipwright 7124.45
7115.0800 Lascar Stager, Ship Building 7124.50
7115.1100 Carpenter Worker, Boat Building 7124.65
7115.1200 Carpenter, Boat Building 7124.70
7115.1300 Caulker, Boat Building 7124.75
7115.9900 Carpenters and Joiners Operatives, Other 7124.90
Family 7119 Building Frame and Related Traders
VOLUME I 145
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Workers Not Elsewhere Classified
7119.0100 Well Digger 7129.10
7119.0200 White Washer 7129.20
7119.0301 Assistant Scaffolder
7119.9900 Building Frame and Related Trades 7129.90
Workers, Other
Group 712 Building Finishers and Related Trades
Workers
Family 7121 Roofers
7121.0100 Tile Layer, Roof 7131.10
7121.9900 Roofers, Other 7131.90
Family 7122 Floor Layers and Tile Setters
7122.0100 Tile Setter 7132.10
7122.0200 Concrete Mixer (Mosaic Tile) 7132.20
7122.0300 Tile Presser (Mosaic) 7132.30
7122.0400 Planer (Mosaic Tile) 7132.40
7122.0500 Mosaic Layer 7132.50
7122.0600 Parquetry Floor Layer 7132.60
7122.9900 Floor Layers and Tile Setters, Other 7132.90
Family 7123 Plasterers
7123.0100 Plasterer 7133.10
7123.9900 Plasterers, Other 7133.90
Family 7124 Insulation Workers
VOLUME I 146
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7124.0100 Building Insulator, Hand 7134.10
7124.0200 Acoustical Insulator 7134.20
7124.0300 Insulator, Boilers and Pipes 7134.30
7124.0400 Insulator, Refrigeration and Air- 7134.40
Conditioning Equipment
7124.9900 Insulation Workers, Other 7134.90
Family 7125 Glaziers
7125.0100 Glazier (Construction) 7135.10
7125.0200 Glazier, Vehicle 7135.20
7125.0300 Picture Framer 7135.30
7125.9900 Glaziers, Other 7135.90
Family 7126 Plumbers and Pipe Fitters
7126.0101 Plumber, General 7136.10
7126.0102 Plumber, Operations
7126.0103 Plumber, General – Installation and Repair
7126.0104 Plumber, General Helper
7126.0105 Plumber, General Assistant
7126.0106 Plumber, Maintenance and Servicing
Assistant
7126.0107 Plumber, Maintenance and Servicing
7126.0201 Pipe Layer/Plumber Pipeline 7136.20
7126.0301 Pipe Fitter 7136.30
7126.0400 Straightening Machine Operator (Iron & 7136.40
VOLUME I 147
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Steel)
7126.0500 Puncher, Metal 7136.50
7126.0600 Pneumatic Chipper 7136.60
7126.9900 Plumbers and Pipe Fitters, Other 7136.90
Family 7127 Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration
Mechanics
7127.0100 Mechanic, Refrigeration and Air- 7233.50
Conditioning
Group 713 Painters, Builders, Structure Cleaners and
Related Trades Workers
Family 7131 Painters and Related Workers
7131.0100 Painter, Building 7141.10
7131.0101 Assistant Painter and Decorator
7131.0200 Painter, Steel Structure 7141.20
7131.0300 Painter, Industrial 7141.25
7131.0500 Paper Hanger/Wallpaper Fixer/Decorator 7141.40
7131.9900 Painters and Related Workers, Other 7141.90
Family 7132 Spray Painters and Varnishers
7132.0100 Painter, General 7142.10
7132.0201 Painter, Spray/Painting Technician (Spray 7142.20
Painting)
7132.0202 Auto Spray Painter/Painter
7132.0203 Auto Body Painting Technician – Surface
Treatment
VOLUME I 148
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7132.0204 Automotive Body Painting Technician
7132.0205 Auto Spray Painter Assistant/Painter
7132.0300 Metal Sprayer 7142.25
7132.0400 Painter, Sign and Letter 7142.30
7132.0500 Painter, Brush 7142.40
7132.0600 Painter, Wood Work and Furniture 7142.50
7132.0700 Painter, Glass 7142.60
7132.0900 Painter, Mate 7142.80
7132.0901 Automotive Paint Shop Assistant
7132.9900 Varnishers and Related Workers, Other 7142.90
Family 7133 Building Structure Cleaners
Sub- 72 Metal, Machinery and Related Trades
Division Workers
Group 721 Sheet and Structural Metal Workers,
Moulders and Welders, and Related
Workers
Family 7211 Metal Moulders and Core Makers
7211.0100 Moulder, General 7211.10
7211.0101 Press Shop Operator
7211.0102 Press Shop Assistant/Helper
7211.0200 Moulder, Machine 7211.20
7211.0201 Casting Technician – Sand Moulding
7211.0300 Moulder, Vertical Pipe 7211.30
VOLUME I 149
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7211.0400 Rammer, Vertical Pipe Moulding 7211.40
7211.0500 Core Maker, Moulding (Hand) 7211.50
7211.0600 Core Maker, Vertical Pipe 7211.60
7211.9900 Metal Moulders and Core Makers, Other 7211.90
Family 7212 Welders and Flame Cutters
7212.0100 Welder, Gas 7212.10
7212.0101 Plumber (Welder)/Plumbing (Sanitary
Fixtures) Fitter Assistant
7212.0102 Plumber (Welder) Assistant
7212.0105 Tungsten Inert Gas Welder
7212.0111 Repair Welder
7212.0200 Welder, Electric 7212.20
7212.0300 Welder, Machine 7212.30
7212.0301 Welder
7212.0302 Welding Technician
7212.0303 Gas Metal Arc Welder/Metal Inert
Gas/Metal Active Gas/Gas Metal Arc
Welder (MIG/MAG/GMAW)
7212.0400 Gas Cutter 7212.40
7212.0402 Plasma Cutter – Manual
7212.0500 Brazer 7212.50
7212.0501 Soldering and Brazing Operator
7212.0600 Lead Burner 7212.60
VOLUME I 150
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7212.0700 Welder, Resistance 7212.65
7212.0801 Welding Assistant
7212.9900 Welders and Flame Cutters, Other 7212.90
Family 7213 Sheet Metal Workers
7213.0101 Sheet Metal Worker, General/Sheet Metal 7213.10
Worker – Hand Tools and Manually
Operated Machines
7213.0200 Sheet Metal Worker, Structural 7213.20
7213.0201 Auto Engine Repair Technician
7213.0301 Dent Remover/Auto Body Repair 7213.30
Technician/ Denter
7213.0302 Auto Body Technician/Denter
7213.0400 Tinsmith/Whitesmith 7213.40
7213.0500 Tin Coater 7213.50
7213.0600 Machine Feeder and Off-Bearer 7213.60
7213.9900 Sheet Metal Workers, Other 7213.90
Family 7214 Structural Metal Preparers and Erectors
7214.0300 Boiler Fitter 7214.30
7214.0400 Tubesmith, Boiler 7214.40
7214.0500 Boiler Maker 7214.50
7214.0600 Erector, Structural 7214.60
7214.0700 Fitter, Structural 7214.65
7214.0800 Fitter, Construction 7214.70
VOLUME I 151
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7214.0900 Riveter 7214.80
7214.1000 Riveter (Railroad Equipment) 7214.82
7214.1101 Assistant Bar Bender and Fixer
7214.9900 Structural Metal Prepares and Erectors, 7214.90
Other
Family 7215 Riggers and Cable Splicers
7215.0100 Rigger 7215.10
7215.0101 Rigger: Rigging of Heavy Material
7215.0200 Slinger 7215.20
7215.0300 Splicer (Rope and Cables) 7215.30
7215.9900 Riggers and Cable Splicers, Other 7215.90
Group 722 Blacksmiths, Tool Makers and Related
Trades Workers
Family 7221 Blacksmiths, Hammersmith and Forging
Press Workers
7221.0100 Blacksmith 7221.10
7221.0200 Village Blacksmith 7221.20
7221.0300 Power Hammer Operator 7221.30
7221.0301 Forging Operator
7221.0400 Hammer Man 7221.40
7221.0500 Stamper/Forging Operator 7221.50
7221.0600 Farrier 7221.60
7221.0700 Wire Drawer/Wire Drawing Machine 7221.70
Operator
VOLUME I 152
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7221.0800 Metal Spinner/Metal spinning Machine 7221.80
Operator
7221.9900 Blacksmiths, Hammersmith and Forging 7221.90
Press Workers, Other
7222 Tool Makers and Related Workers
Family 7222.0100 Marker, Metal 7222.10
7222.0200 Tool Maker 7222.20
7222.0300 Jig and Fixture Marker 7222.30
7222.0400 Jig Borer 7222.40
7222.0500 Die Maker 7222.50
7222.0600 Die Sinker, Hand 7222.60
7222.0700 Locksmith 7222.70
7222.0800 Pattern Marker, Metal Foundry 7222.80
7222.0900 Armourer 7222.85
7222.9900 Tool Makers and Related Workers, Other 7222.90
Family 7223 Metal Working Machine Tool Setters and
Operators
7223.0100 Tool Setter, General 7223.10
7223.0200 Tool Setter, Press 7223.20
7223.0300 Setter, Drop Forging Machine 7223.30
7223.0400 Setter, Automatic Machine 7223.40
7223.0401 Assembly Line Machine Setter
7223.0500 Mechanist, General/Machinist 8211.10
VOLUME I 153
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7223.0501 Machine Shop Master Technician/Setter
7223.0502 Machine Shop Supervisor
7223.0601 Turner/Conventional Turning 8211.15
7223.0700 Turret and Capstan Lathe Operator 8211.20
7223.0701 Lathe Machinist
7223.0800 Shaper 8211.22
7223.0900 Planer 8211.24
7223.1000 Planer, Edge 8211.26
7223.1100 Slotter 8211.28
7223.1201 Miller/Operator – Conventional Milling 8211.30
7223.1300 Gear Cutter 8211.32
7223.1400 Heavy Duty End Mill Operator 8211.34
7223.1500 Driller Metal, General 8211.36
7223.1600 Radial Driller 8211.38
7223.1701 Borer/Operator Boring Machine Operator 8211.40
7223.1800 Cylinder Borer 8211.42
7223.1900 Rifling Machine Operator 8211.44
7223.2000 Bending Machine Operator 8211.46
7223.2100 Glazer 8211.50
7223.2200 Grinder, Tool and Cutter 8211.55
7223.2300 Power Press Operator, Metal 8211.60
7223.2400 Sheet Metal Machine Operator 8211.61
VOLUME I 154
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7223.2500 Ball Filling Machine Operator 8211.62
7223.2600 Ball Lapping Machine Operator 8211.64
7223.2700 Dividing Machine Operator 8211.66
7223.2800 Die Copying Machine Operator/Die Sinking 8211.70
Electric Discharge Machine Operator
7223.2900 Profiling Machine Operator 8211.75
7223.3000 Metal Stamper 8211.80
7223.5001 Machining Technician/CNC Operator
7223.5002 CNC Operator – Machining Technician
7223.5003 CNC Operator – Machinist
7223.5004 CNC Operator - Vertical Machining Centre
7223.5005 CNC Setter-cum-Operator – Vertical
Machining Centre
7223.6001 CNC Setter-cum-Operator – Turning
7223.6002 CNC Operator – Turning
7223.6003 CNC Programmer
7223.9900 Metal Working Machine Tool Setters and 8211.90
Operators, Others
Family 7224 Metal Polishers, Wheel Grinders and Tool
Sharpeners
7224.0100 Grinder, General 7224.10
7224.0102 Fitter – Fabrication
7224.0200 Grinder, Crankshaft 7224.20
7224.0300 Roll Grinder 7224.25
VOLUME I 155
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7224.0400 Surface Grinder 7224.30
7224.0401 Grinder – Hand-Held and Power Tools
7224.0402 Operator – Conventional Surface Grinding
Machines
7224.0500 Thread Grinder 7224.35
7224.0600 Honer/Honing Machine Operator 7224.40
7224.0700 Lapper 7224.45
7224.0701 Super Finishing Technician
7224.0801 Polisher 7224.55
7224.0900 Saw Grinder, Hand 7224.65
7224.1100 Metal Bluer 7224.80
7224.9900 Metal Wheel Grinder, Polishing and Tool 7224.90
Sharpeners, Other
Group 723 Machinery Mechanics and Repairers
Family 7231 Motor Vehicle Mechanics and Repairers
7231.0100 Mechanic, Automobile 7231.10
7231.0101 Maintenance Technician – Service
Workshop
7231.0102 AC Specialist
7231.0103 Automotive Body Technician Level 3
7231.0104 Automotive Body Technician Level 4
7231.0105 Brake Specialist
7231.0106 Clutch Specialist
VOLUME I 156
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7231.0107 Auto Service Technician – Mechanic
7231.0108 Auto Service Technician – Helper
7231.0200 Engine Tester 7231.20
7231.0201 Test Technician
7231.0300 Tractor Mechanic 7231.30
7231.0400 Fitter Automobile 7231.40
7231.0401 Mechanic Fitter
7231.0500 Mechanic, Motor Cycle 7231.50
7231.0501 Auto Service Technician (Two and Three
Wheelers)
7231.0900 Cleaner Motor Vehicle 7231.60
7231.9900 Motor Vehicle Mechanics, Other 7231.90
Family 7232 Aircraft Engine Mechanics and Repairers
7232.0100 Airframe Erector 7232.10
7232.0200 Mechanic Aircraft, Propeller 7232.20
7232.0300 Engine Tester, Aircraft 7232.30
7232.0400 Engine Tester, Helper, Aircraft 7232.40
7232.0500 Mechanic Aircraft Engine, Field 7232.50; 7232.70
Service/Filed Mechanic Aircraft
7232.0600 Mechanic Aircraft, Engine Overhauling 7232.60
7232.9900 Aircraft Mechanics, Other 7232.90
Family 7233 Agricultural and Industrial Machinery
Mechanics and Repairers
VOLUME I 157
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7233.0100 Fitter, General 7233.10
7233.0101 Maintenance Fitter – Mechanical
7233.0102 Machinist
7233.0121 Fitter Levelling, Alignment & Balancing
7233.0200 Fitter, Bench 7233.20
7233.0300 Mechanic, Petrol Engine 7233.22
7233.0301 Bearing Maintenance
7233.0400 Mechanic, Diesel Engine 7233.24
7233.0401 Belt Conveyor Maintenance
7233.0402 Conveyor Operation and Maintenance
7233.0600 Mechanic, Gas/Diesel Engine 7233.26
7233.0700 Mechanic, Earth Moving Machinery 7233.28
7233.0701 Mobile Equipment Maintenance
7233.0800 Mechanic, Road Roller 7233.30
7233.0900 Mechanic, Turbine 7233.32
7233.1000 Mechanic, Stationery Steam Engine 7233.34
7233.1100 Mechanic, Maintenance, Chemical 7233.36
Plant/Technician, Maintenance, Chemical
Plant
7233.1200 Millwright 7233.38
7233.1300 Mechanic, Pump 7233.40
7233.1301 Plumber (Pumps & E/M Mechanic)
7233.1400 Mechanic, Dairy Maintenance 7233.42
VOLUME I 158
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7233.1500 Mechanic, Mining Machinery 7233.44
7233.1600 Mechanic, Textile Machinery 7233.46
7233.1700 Mechanic, Printing Machinery 7233.48
7233.1800 Mechanic, Sewing Machine 7233.52
7233.1900 Lamp Repairman, Mines 7233.55
7233.2000 Mechanic, Repairman (Domestic 7233.58
Appliances)
7233.2100 Fitter, Stationery Steam Engine 7233.60
7233.2200 Fitter, Marine 7233.62
7233.2300 Fitter, Railway Carriage and Wagon 7233.63
7233.2400 Fitter, Loco 7233.64
7233.2500 Loco Cleaner 7233.65
7233.2600 Fitter, Bicycle 7233.66
7233.2700 Fitter, Signal 7233.70
7233.2800 Agriculture Engineering Technician 7233.80
7233.2901 Fitter: Hydraulic and Pneumatic System
7233.9900 Machinery Mechanics and Fitters, Other 7233.90
Family 7234 Bicycle and Related Repairers
Sub- 73 Handicraft and Printing Workers
Division
Group 731 Handicraft Workers
Family 7311 Precision Instrument Makers and Repairers
7311.0100 Mechanic Precision Instrument, General 7311.10
VOLUME I 159
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7311.0101 Technician Instrumentation
7311.0200 Watch Repairer 7311.20
7311.0300 Assembler (Clock & Watch) 7311.25
7311.0400 Mechanic Precision Instrument, Mechanical 7311.30
7311.0401 Fitter Instrumentation
7311.0500 Viewer, Workshop 7311.35
7311.0600 Mechanic, Atomizer and Fuel Pump (Diesel) 7311.40
7311.0800 Mechanic, Optical Instrument 7311.60
7311.0900 Calibrator, Glass 7311.65
7311.1000 Calibrator (Instrument & Apparatus) 7311.67
7311.1001 Calibration Technician
7311.1002 Calibration Engineer
7311.1100 Calibrator, Other 7311.70
7311.1200 Orthopaedic Appliances and Limb 7311.75
Technician
7311.1400 Instrument Maker, Other 7311.85
7311.9900 Precision Instrument Makers and Repairers, 7311.90
Other
Family 7312 Musical Instrument Makers and Tuners
7312.0100 Musical Instrument Maker (String ) 7312.10
7312.0200 Harmonium Maker 7312.15
7312.0300 Harmonium Key Maker 7312.18
7312.0400 Harmonium Fitter 7312.20
VOLUME I 160
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7312.0500 Bellow Man (Harmonium) 7312.22
7312.0600 Reed Fitter (Harmonium) 7312.25
7312.0800 Finisher (Harmonium) 7312.30
7312.1000 Organ Tuner 7312.35
7312.1200 Piano Tuner 7312.43
7312.1300 Tabla Maker (Musical Instrument) 7312.45
7312.1400 Drum Maker, Musical 7312.50
7312.1500 Clarinet Assembler 7312.55
7312.1600 Bagpipe Maker 7312.58
7312.1700 Brass Musical Instruments Assembler 7312.60
7312.1800 Musical Instrument Repairer 7312.65
7312.9900 Musical Instrument Makers and Tuners, 7312.90
Other
Family 7313 Jewellery and Precision Metal Workers
7313.0100 Roller, Gold and Silver 7313.10
7313.0101 Jewellery Polisher
7313.0102 Plater
7313.0103 Filer and Assembler
7313.0201 Wire Maker, Gold and Silver/Component 7313.15
Maker
7313.0202 Gemstone Thread Maker
7313.0301 Gold Curer, General/Gold Refiner 7313.18
7313.0401 Gold Curer, Mint/Gold Melter and Refiner 7313.20
VOLUME I 161
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7313.0500 Gold Foil Maker 7313.22
7313.0600 Leaf Maker, Gold and Silver 7313.25
7313.0700 Goldsmith 7313.28
7313.0701 Polisher and Cleaner
7313.0702 Goldsmith Enameller
7313.0703 Goldsmith Frame Maker
7313.0801 Jewel Setter/Setter 7313.30
7313.0802 Metal Setter
7313.0803 Wax Setter
7313.0804 Wax Tree Maker
7313.0901 Gem Sorter 7313.35
7313.0902 Rough Assorter
7313.0903 Rough Marker
7313.1001 Gem Slicer/Gemstone Rough Cutter 7313.45
7313.1101 Gem Cleaver 7313.50
7313.1201 Inclusion Plotter
7313.1202 Planner
7313.1300 Gem Grinder, Hand 7313.55
7313.1301 Manual Bruter
7313.1302 Auto Blocker
7313.1303 Gemstone Facet Maker
7313.1304 Table Cutter
VOLUME I 162
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7313.1305 Manual Blocker
7313.1306 Auto Bruter
7313.1400 Gem Polisher, Hand 7313.60
7313.1501 Diamond Assorter
7313.1502 Polished Diamond Grader & Assorter (Basic)
7313.1503 Polished Diamond Grader & Assorter
(Advance)
7313.1504 Bottom Polisher
7313.1505 Gemstone Girdle Polisher
7313.1506 Gemstone Polisher
7313.1601 Gemstone Pre-Shaper
7313.1602 Gemstone Final Shaper and Calibrator
7313.1701 Gem Driller 7313.68
7313.1702 Window Opener
7313.1800 Jewellery Engraver 7313.70
7313.1900 Engraver 7313.71
7313.2200 Embosser, Sheet 7313.75
7313.2300 Inlayer, Metal 7313.78
7313.2401 Rubber Mould Maker
7313.2402 Wax Piece Maker
7313.2501 Boiling In-Charge
7313.2601 Final Quality Inspector
VOLUME I 163
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7313.9900 Jewellery, Goldsmith and Silversmith 7313.90
Workers, Other
Family 7314 Potters and Related Workers
7314.0100 Mould Maker, Pottery and Porcelain 7321.10
7314.0200 Caster, Pottery and Porcelain 7321.15
7314.0300 Clay Toy Maker/Hand Moulder 7321.20
7314.0400 Moulder, Hand (Ceramics) 7321.25
7314.0500 Maker (Pottery and Porcelain)/Jigger and 7321.30
Jolly Operator
7314.0600 Turner Pottery and Porcelain 7321.35
7314.0700 Bricks and Tile Moulder, Hand 7321.40
7314.0800 Abrasive Wheel Moulder 7321.50
7314.0900 Potter (Pottery and Porcelain)/Potter's 7321.60
Wheel Operator
7314.1000 Granulator Attendant (Cement) 7329.20
7314.1100 Clay Maker (Pottery) 7329.25
7314.1200 Checker (Ceramics) 7329.35
7314.1300 Sorter, Brick and Tile 7329.40
7314.9900 Abrasive Wheel Formers, Potters and 7321.90
Related Workers, Other
Family 7315 Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders and
Finishers
7315.0100 Blower, Glass 7322.10
7315.0200 Blower, Laboratory Apparatus 7322.12
VOLUME I 164
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7315.0300 Blower Helper (Glass) 7322.14; 7322.16;
7322.18
7315.0600 Mouldman (Glass) 7322.20
7315.0700 Bender (Glass) 7322.22
7315.0800 Gatherer (Glass) 7322.24
7315.0900 Drawer (Glass) 7322.26
7315.1000 Bead Maker (Glass) 7322.28
7315.1100 Optical Worker 7322.29
7315.1200 Lens Grinder 7322.30
7315.1300 Edger (Optical glass) 7322.32
7315.1400 Lens Polisher (Optical) 7322.34
7315.1500 Lens Centerer and Edger (Optical Glass) 7322.35
7315.1600 Wheel Grinder (Glass) 7322.38
7315.1700 Edge Finisher (Glass) 7322.40
7315.1800 Cutter, Glass Bangles 7322.45
7315.1900 Cooling Man (Glass) 7322.50
7315.2000 Glass Cutter, Other 7322.55
7315.2100 Joiner, Glass Bangles 7322.60
7315.2200 Crusher Attendant, Stone 7329.10
7315.2300 Grinder (Stone and Clay) 7329.15
7315.2400 Sorter, Glass Products 7329.30
7315.9900 Glass Makers, Cutters, Grinders and 7322.90
Finishers, Other
VOLUME I 165
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 7316 Signwriter, Decorative Painters, Engravers
and Etchers
7316.0100 Engraver, Glass 7323.10
7316.0200 Glass Etcher 7323.20
7316.0300 Sand Blaster (Glass) 7323.30
7316.0400 Volume Man/Calibrating Technician 7323.40
7316.0500 Waxing Man (Glass)/Helper 7323.50
Calibrator/Decorator, Glass
7316.0600 Glass Enameller 7324.10
7316.0700 Hand Painter (Ceramics) 7324.20
7316.0800 Decorator (Ceramics) 7324.30
7316.0900 Spray Painter, (Ceramics) 7324.40
7316.1000 Glazer, Pottery and Porcelain 7324.50
7316.1100 Mirror Silverer 7324.60
7316.1200 Signwriter, Decorative Painters, Engravers 7324.90
and Etchers, Other
Family 7317 Handicraft Workers in Wood, Basketry and
Related Materials
7317.0100 Lamp Shade Maker 7331.10
7317.0300 Furniture Maker, Bamboo 7424.10
7317.0400 Furniture Maker, Reed 7424.15
7317.0500 Furniture Maker, Cane 7424.20
7317.0600 Caner 7424.25
7317.0700 Basket Maker 7424.30
VOLUME I 166
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7317.0800 Mat Weaver, Bamboo 7424.35
7317.0900 Mat Weaver, Grass and Leave 7424.40
7317.1000 Broom Maker 7424.45
7317.1100 Chick Maker 7424.50
7317.1200 Khas Thatti Maker 7424.55
7317.1300 Brush Material Preparer 7424.60
7317.1400 Brush Maker, Hand 7424.65
7317.9900 Basketry Weavers, Brush Makers and 7424.90
Related Workers, Other
Family 7318 Handicraft Workers in Textiles, Leather
and Related Materials
7318.0100 Candle Maker 7332.10
7318.0200 Candle Moulder 7332.20
7318.0300 Carpet Weaver (Carpet & Rug) 7332.30
7318.0400 Knitting Machine Operator, Automatic 7332.40
7318.0500 Hand Printer, Textile/Hand Block Printer 7332.50
7318.0600 Hand Dyer 7332.60
7318.0800 Repairer, Fabrics/Fabric Mender 7332.80
7318.0900 Bale Breaker Tenter, Cotton/Blow Room 7431.10
Operator
7318.1000 Batching Worker, Wool 7431.12
7318.1100 Wool Sorter 7431.14
7318.1200 Selector, Jute 7431.16
VOLUME I 167
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7318.1300 Grader, Coir 7431.18
7318.1500 Waste Machine Man (Cotton Textile)/Waste 7431.22
Collection Machine Operator
7318.1800 Scouring Man, Wool/Wool Washing and 7431.28
Scouring Operator
7318.1900 Cooker (Silkworm) 7431.30
7318.2000 Softener Feeder and Receiver, Jute 7431.32
7318.2100 Root Cutter, Jute 7431.34
7318.2200 Teaser (Feeder and Receiver) Jute 7431.40
7318.2300 Fibre Preparer, Coir 7431.42
7318.2700 Cardtenter, Cotton/Carding Tenter 7431.50
7318.2800 Set Framer, Silk 7431.52
7318.2900 Sliver Lap Man/Combing Preparatory 7431.54
Operator
7318.3400 Comb Minder/Combing Preparatory 7431.66
Operator
7318.3500 Gill Box Man 7431.68
7318.3600 Spreader Feeder, Jute 7431.70
7318.3700 Spreader, Receiver, Jute 7431.71
7318.3800 Breaker Feeder, Jute 7431.72
7318.4000 Finisher Feeder, Jute 7431.75
7318.4200 Hand Spinner (Cotton and Woollen Textile) 7432.20
7318.4300 Piecer 7432.22
7318.4500 Spinner, Jute 7432.26
VOLUME I 168
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7318.4600 Spinner, Coir 7432.28
7318.4700 Twister 7432.30
7318.4800 Doffer, Spinning/Ring Spinning Doffer 7432.32
7318.4900 Knotter, Silk 7432.40
7318.5000 Beam Gaiter 7432.42
7318.5100 Lacer, Hand 7432.45
7318.5200 Lattice Pegger 7432.50
7318.5300 Reacher, Hand (Textile) 7432.52
7318.5500 Weaver Power Loom 7432.55
7318.5800 Weaver, Handloom 7432.58
7318.5900 Carpet Weaver, Hand Knitting 7432.59
7318.6000 Carpet Clipper, Hand 7432.60
7318.6100 Carpet Embosser 7432.61
7318.6200 Carpet Repairer 7432.62
7318.6300 Coir Weaver (Matting) 7432.63
7318.6400 Net Maker, Hand 7432.70
7318.6500 Crochet Worker, Hand 7432.72
7318.6600 Knitter, Hand 7432.74
7318.6700 Braid Maker, Hand 7432.76
7318.9900 Handicraft Workers in Textiles, Leather and 7432.90
Related Materials, Others
Family 7319 Handicrafts Workers Not Elsewhere
Classified
VOLUME I 169
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Group 732 Printing Trades Workers
Family 7321 Pre-Press Technicians
7321.0100 Compositor, Hand 7341.15
7321.0200 Impositor 7341.20
7321.0300 Distributor (Letter Press) 7341.25
7321.0400 Composing Room Operatives 7341.30
7321.0500 Stereo Matrix Moulder 7342.10
7321.0600 Stereotype Caster 7342.20
7321.0700 Electrotyper 7342.30
7321.0800 Lithographic Artist 7343.10
7321.0801 Circuit Imaging Operator
7321.0802 Circuit Imaging Operator – Photo Imaging
7321.0900 Retoucher, Lithographic 7343.15
7321.1000 Mounter/Mounting Machine Operator/CNC 7343.20
Mounting Machine Operator
7321.1200 Cameraman, Photomechanical 7343.30
7321.1300 Microstat Cameraman 7343.35
7321.1400 Photostat Camera Operator/Photocopier 7343.40
Operator
7321.1500 Transferor, Photomechanical 7343.45
7321.1600 Etcher Photo Engraving 7343.50
7321.1700 Barman, Lino Machine 7343.60
7321.9900 Pre-Press Technicians, Others 7343.90
VOLUME I 170
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 7322 Printers
7322.0200 Lino Operator 7341.35
7322.0300 Mono Operator 7341.40
7322.0400 Mono Caster 7341.45
7322.0500 Type Caster 7341.50
7322.0600 Maker-Up, Photo Type Setting 7341.55
7322.0700 Photo Type Setting Machine Operator 7341.60
7322.0800 Type Dresser 7341.65
7322.0900 Roller Maker, Paper Printing 7341.70
7322.1000 Braille – Duplicating Machine Operator 7341.80
(Printing & Publishing)
7322.1100 Stencil Cutter, Silk Screen Printing 7346.10
7322.1200 Silk Screen Printer 7346.20
7322.1300 Printing Jobber 7346.30
7322.1400 Colour Maker (Textile Product) 7346.40
7322.1500 Precision Printing Worker 7346.50
7322.1600 Frontman 7346.60
7322.1700 Pressman (Flatbed, Letter Press) 8251.10
7322.1800 Machineman, Hand Printing 8251.20
7322.1900 Machineman, Automatic Printing 8251.30
7322.2000 Machineman, Rotary Printing 8251.40
7322.2100 Machineman, Offset Printing 8251.45
VOLUME I 171
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7322.2200 Machineman, Direct Lithographic Printing 8251.50
7322.2300 Pressman, Roto Gravure 8251.60
7322.9900 Printers, Others 8251.90
Family 7323 Print Finishing and Binding Workers
7323.0100 Book Binder 7345.10
7323.0200 Map and Chart Mounter 7345.20
7323.0300 Book Mender 7345.30
7323.0400 Book Binding Worker 7345.40
7323.9900 Book Binders and Related Workers, Other 7345.90
Sub- 74 Electrical and Electronics Trades Workers
Division
Group 741 Electrical Equipment Installers and
Repairers
Family 7411 Building and Related Electricians
7411.0100 Electrician, General 7137.10
7411.0101 Access Controls Installation Technician
7411.0102 CCTV Installation Technician
7411.0200 Electrician (Mines) 7137.15
7411.0301 Wireman, Light and Power 7137.20
7411.0500 Meter Sealer, Electrical 7137.35
7411.0600 Electrician, Stage and Studio 7137.40
7411.9900 Building and Related Electricians, Other 7137.90
Family 7412 Electrical Mechanics and Fitters
VOLUME I 172
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7412.0100 Mechanic, Precision Instrument, Electrical 7241.10
7412.0101 Automation Specialist
7412.0102 In-Circuit Testing Machine Operator
7412.0103 Automated Optical Inspection Operator
7412.0104 Bare Board Testing Operator
7412.0200 Electrical Fitter 7241.20
7412.0201 Fitter – Electrical and Electronic Assembly
7412.0202 Mechanical Fitter
7412.0203 Fitter Electrical Assembly
7412.0300 Adjuster, Relays 7241.30
7412.0400 Armature Winder 7241.40
7412.0500 Coil Winder, Machine 7241.50
7412.0600 Electrician, Aircraft 7241.60
7412.0701 Electrician, Automobile 7241.70
7412.0801 Maintenance Assistant/Helper
7412.0901 Potting and Curing Operator
7412.1001 Mechanical Fitter – Control Panel
7412.1002 Site Engineer – Control Panel
7412.9900 Electrical Mechanics and Fitters, Other 7241.90
Family 7413 Electrical Line Installers and Repairers
7413.0100 Lineman, Light and Power 7245.10
7413.9900 Electrical Line Installers, Repairers and 7245.90
VOLUME I 173
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Cable Jointers, Other
Family 7419 Electrical and Electronic Equipment
Mechanics and Fitters and Related
Workers Not Elsewhere Classified
7419.0100 Senior Functioner (Telephone Equipment 7249.10
Manufacturing)
7419.0200 Junior Functioner (Telephone Equipment 7249.20
Manufacturing)
7419.0300 Wiring Inspector and Bank Tester 7249.30
(Telephone Equipment Manufacturing)
7419.0400 Inspector, Assembly (Telephone Equipment 7249.40
Manufacturing)
7419.0500 Battery Servicing Man 7249.50
7419.0600 Operator, Impregnation Plant (Telephone 7249.60
Equipment Manufacturing)
7419.9900 Electrical and Electronic Equipment 7249.90
Mechanics and Fitters and Related Workers,
Other
Group 742 Electronics and Telecommunication
Installers and Repairers
Family 7421 Electronic Mechanics and Servicers
7421.0100 Electronics Fitter, General 7242.10
7421.0101 Fitter Electronic Assembly
7421.0300 Electronic Mechanic 7243.10
7421.0401 Field Technician: Air-Conditioner
7421.0501 Field Technician: Refrigerator
7421.0601 Field Technician: Washing Machine
VOLUME I 174
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7421.0701 Field Technician: Other Home Appliances
7421.0801 Field Technician: UPS and Inverter
7421.0901 Field Technician: Digital Camera
7421.1001 Field Engineer – RACW
7421.1101 Repair Assistant: Switches
7421.1201 Auto-Tester Capacitor
7421.1202 Testing Technician
7421.1301 TV Repair Technician
7421.1302 Field Engineer TV
7421.1401 Solar Panel Installation Technician
7421.1402 Solar Photo Voltaic System Installation
Technician
7421.1403 PV System Installation Engineer
7421.9900 Electronic Fitters, Mechanics and Servicers, 7243.90
Other
Family 7422 Information and Communications
Technology Installers and Servicers
7422.0100 Installation Mechanic 7244.10
7422.0200 Maintenance Mechanic 7244.20
7422.0201 Fault Management Engineer
7422.0202 Grass Root Telecom Provider (GRTP)
7422.0203 Handset Repair Engineer (Level II)
7422.0204 Infrastructure Engineer
VOLUME I 175
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7422.0400 Lineman, Telephone and Telegraph 7244.40
7422.0600 Fault Controller, Telephones 7244.60
7422.0700 Carrier Attendant (Telephone) and 7244.70
Telegraph
7422.0800 Cable Jointer 7245.20
7422.0801 Optical Fibre Technician
7422.0802 Optical Fibre Splicer
7422.0900 Radar Mechanic 7243.20
7422.1000 X-Ray Mechanic 7243.30
7422.1001 Installation and Service Engineer
7422.1100 Television Installation Man 7243.40
7422.1200 Cable Television Installer 7243.45
7422.1201 Set-Top Box Installer/Service Technician
7422.1202 DTH Set-Top Box Installer and Service
Technician
7422.1203 DAS Set-Top Box Installer and Service
Technician
7422.1300 Television Service and Repairman 7243.50
7422.1302 Television Repair Technician
7422.1400 Radio Technician (Radio Manufacturing) 7243.60
7422.1500 Radio Mechanic 7243.70
7422.1600 Radio Craftsman, Installation 7243.75
7422.1700 Radio Craftsman, Maintenance 7243.80
VOLUME I 176
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7422.1801 Site Surveyor/R F Site Surveyor
7422.1901 Assembly Line Operator
7422.2001 Field Technician: (Computing and
Peripherals)
7422.2002 Installation (Computing and Peripherals)
7422.2101 Field Technician: (Networking and Storage)
7422.2201 Test and Repair Technician
7422.2301 Smartphones Repair Technician
7422.3001 Tower Technician
7422.9900 Information and Communications
Technology Installers and Servicers, Other
Sub- 75 Food Processing, Woodworking, Garment
Division and Other Craft and Related Trades
Workers
Group 751 Food Processing and Related Trade
Workers
Family 7511 Butchers, Fishmongers and Related Food
Preparers
7511.0100 Butcher 7411.10
7511.0200 Slaughterer 7411.20
7511.0300 Sausage Maker 7411.30
7511.0400 Briner 7411.40
7511.0500 Pickler (Meat Product) 7411.45
7511.0600 Shactor 7411.50
7511.9900 Butchers, Fishmongers and Related Food 7411.90
VOLUME I 177
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Preparers, Other
Family 7512 Bakers, Pastry Cooks and Confectionery
Makers
7512.0100 Baker (Baking Products) 7412.10
7512.0200 Mixing Machine Attendant 7412.15
7512.0300 Ovenman (Bakery Products) 7412.20
7512.0400 Sweet Meat Maker 7412.25
7512.0500 Candy Maker 7412.30
7512.0600 Panman (Confectionery) 7412.35
7512.0700 Plate Worker, Confectionery 7412.40
7512.0800 Chocolate Maker 7412.50
7512.0900 Conche Operator (Sugar & Confectionery) 7412.60
7512.1000 Yeast Maker (Beverage) 7412.70
7512.9900 Bakers, Pastry Cooks and Confectionery 7412.90
Makers, Other
Family 7513 Dairy Products Makers
7513.0100 Dairy Worker, General 7413.10
7513.0200 Separator Man 7413.20
7513.0300 Butter Maker 7413.30
7513.0400 Cheese Maker 7413.40
7513.0500 Ice-Cream Maker 7413.50
7513.9900 Dairy Products Makers, Others 7413.90
Family 7514 Fruits, Vegetables and Related Preservers
VOLUME I 178
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7514.0100 Oil Expeller Man 7414.10
7514.0200 Oil Crusher Operator, Animal-Driven 7414.20
7514.0300 Grinder, Hand (Food Grain) 7414.30
7514.0400 Pounder, Hand (Food Grain) 7414.35
7514.0500 Parcher (Food Grain) 7414.36
7514.0600 Washing Machine Attendant, Cleaner (Food 7414.38
Grain)
7514.0700 Cook, General (Food Canning and 7414.40
Preserving)
7514.0800 Condiment Maker (Food Canning & 7414.50
Preserving)
7514.0900 Cannery Worker (Can & Preservation) 7414.52
7514.1000 Pickler (Can & Preservation) 7414.54
7514.1100 Preservative Filler, Machine (Can & 7414.56
Preservation)
7514.9900 Fruits, Vegetables and Related Preservers, 7414.90
Others
Family 7515 Food and Beverage Tasters and Graders
7515.0100 Tea Taster 7415.10
7515.0200 Liquor Taster 7415.20
7515.0300 Taster (Food) 7415.30
7515.0400 Grader, Meat 7415.40
7515.9900 Food and Beverage Tasters and Graders, 7415.90
Other
Family 7516 Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco Products
VOLUME I 179
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Makers
7516.0100 Tobacco Curer 7416.10
7516.0200 Tobacco Grader 7416.15
7516.0300 Blender, Tobacco 7416.20
7516.0400 Conditioner, Tobacco 7416.25
7516.0500 Cigar or Cheroot Roller 7416.30
7516.0600 Cigar or Cheroot Roller Helper 7416.35
7516.0700 Bidi Maker 7416.40
7516.0800 Furnace Man, Bidi 7416.45
7516.0900 Bidi Checker 7416.50
7516.1000 Snuff Maker 7416.55
7516.1100 Chewing Tobacco Maker 7416.60
7516.9900 Tobacco Preparers and Tobacco Products 7416.90
Makers, Other
Group 752 Wood Treaters, Cabinet Makers and
Related Trades Workers
Family 7521 Wood Treaters
7521.0100 Kiln Operator, Wood 7421.10
7521.0200 Impregnator, Wood 7421.20
7521.0300 Wood Bender 7421.30
7521.0400 Wood Treater 7421.40
7521.0500 Grader (Wood Working) 7421.50
7521.9900 Wood Treaters, Other 7421.90
VOLUME I 180
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 7522 Cabinet Makers and Related Workers
7522.0100 Furniture Maker, Wood 7422.10
7522.0200 Cabinet Maker 7422.15
7522.0600 Body Builder, Automobile 7422.25
7522.0700 Coach Builder, Railway 7422.28
7522.0800 Body Builder, Other Vehicles 7422.30
7522.0900 Wood Marker 7422.35
7522.1000 Pattern Marker, Wood 7422.38
7522.1100 Cooper 7422.40
7522.1200 Wood Carver, Hand 7422.42
7522.1300 Inlayer, Wood 7422.45
7522.1400 Toy Maker, Wood 7422.48
7522.1500 Pith Worker, Wood 7422.50
7522.1600 Picture Frame Maker 7422.52
7522.1800 Sports Goods Maker, Wood 7422.58
7522.1900 Wood Lacquerer 7422.60
7522.2000 Wood Polisher 7422.62
7522.2100 Paper Board Maker 7422.65
7522.9900 Cabinet Makers and Related Workers, Other 7422.90
Family 7523 Wood Working Machine Tool Setters and
Operators
7523.0100 Wood Machinist, General 7423.10
VOLUME I 181
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7523.0200 Wood Turner, Machine 7423.15
7523.0300 Wood, Turner Hand 7423.20
7523.0400 Shaper Wood 7423.25
7523.0500 Router, Wood 7423.30
7523.0600 Planer, Wood 7423.35
7523.0700 Four Cutter 7423.40
7523.0800 Wood Sawyer, Hand 7423.42
7523.0900 Moulder, Wood 7423.45
7523.1000 Mortiser Operator 7423.50
7523.1100 Tennoning Machine Operator 7423.55
7523.1200 Jointer Machine Operator 7423.60
7523.1300 Driller Wood 7423.65
7523.1400 Dowell Machine Operator 7423.70
7523.1500 Wood Wool Machine Operator 7423.80
7523.1600 Wood Carver, Machine 8241.10
7523.1700 Fret Saw Machine Operator 8241.20
7523.1800 Sander Operator 8241.30
7523.9900 Wood Working Machine Setters and Setter 8241.90
Operators, Others
Group 753 Garment and Related Trades Workers
Family 7531 Tailors, Dressmakers, Furriers and Hatters
7531.0100 Tailor, General 7433.10
VOLUME I 182
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7531.0101 Sampling Tailor
7531.0200 Dressmaker/Ladies Dressmaker 7433.15
7531.0300 Coat Maker 7433.20
7531.0400 Trouser Maker 7433.25
7531.0500 Shirt Maker 7433.30
7531.0700 Hat Maker, General 7433.40
7531.0900 Cap Maker 7433.50
7531.1000 Wig Maker 7433.60
7531.1200 Tailor, Fur 7434.10
7531.1300 Pattern Maker, Fur 7434.20
7531.1400 Grader and Matcher, Fur 7434.30
7531.1500 Cutter, Fur 7434.40
7531.1600 Nailor, Fur 7434.50
7531.9900 Tailors, Dressmakers, Furriers and Hatters, 7434.90
Other
Family 7532 Garment and Related Pattern Makers and
Cutters
7532.0100 Designer (Garment) 7435.10
7532.0200 Designer, Leather Articles 7435.15
7532.0300 Case Finisher (Leather Product) 7435.18
7532.0500 Frame Maker, Cap 7435.25
7532.0600 Master Cutter (Garment) 7435.30
7532.0700 Cutter, Hand (Textile Product) 7435.35
VOLUME I 183
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7532.0900 Cutter, Machine (Textile Product) 7435.40
7532.0901 Garment Cutter (CAM)
7532.0902 Advance Pattern Maker, Garment
(CAD/CAM)
7532.0903 Layerman
7532.1000 Cutter, Garment (Leather) 7435.45
7532.1001 Cutter, Goods and Garments (Leather)
7532.1100 Cutter, Gloves (Leather) 7435.50
7532.1200 Button Hole Maker 7435.55
7532.1300 Cutter Tent 7435.60
7532.9900 Garment and Related Pattern Makers and 7435.90
Cutters, Other
Family 7533 Sewing, Embroiderers and Related
Workers
7533.0100 Sewer, Hand 7436.10
7533.0201 Hand Embroiderer, General 7436.15
7533.0300 Hand Embroiderer, Zari/Hand Embroider, 7436.20
Traditional Crafts
7533.0600 Darner 7436.35
7533.0700 Sewer, Tent (Hand) 7436.40
7533.0800 Umbrella Maker 7436.45
7533.0900 Umbrella Examiner 7436.50
7533.1000 Sail and Awning Maker 7436.60
7533.1100 Tailor, Tent (Machine) 7436.70
VOLUME I 184
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7533.1200 Doll Maker 7436.80
7533.9900 Sewers, Embroiderers and Related Workers, 7436.90
Other
Family 7534 Upholsterers and Related Workers
7534.0100 Upholsterer, Furniture 7437.10
7534.0200 Upholsterer, Orthopaedic Appliances 7437.20
7534.0300 Upholsterer, Vehicle 7437.30
7534.0400 Cushion Maker 7437.40
7534.0500 Mattress Maker (Spring) 7437.45
7534.9900 Upholsterers and Related Workers, Other 7437.90
Family 7535 Pelt Dressers, Tanners and Fellmongers
7535.0100 Sorter, Hides and Skin 7441.10
7535.0200 Flayer 7441.15
7535.0300 Lime Pitman, Leather 7441.18
7535.0400 Dehairer, Hand 7441.20
7535.0500 Flesher, Hand 7441.22
7535.0600 Delimer 7441.24
7535.0700 Scudder, Hand 7441.26
7535.0900 Fluffer, Hand 7441.30
7535.1000 Staker, Hand 7441.32
7535.1100 Bark Pitman (Tanning) 7441.34
7535.1200 Drum Man (Tanning) 7441.36
VOLUME I 185
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7535.1300 Leather, Currier 7441.38
7535.1400 Dyer, Leather 7441.40
7535.1500 Embosser, Leather 7441.42
7535.1600 Seasoner, Leather 7441.44
7535.1700 Pelt Dresser, General 7441.46
7535.1800 Pelt Grader 7441.48
7535.1900 Pelt Flesher 7441.50
7535.2000 Pelt Plucker and Trimmer 7441.52
7535.2100 Pelt Dyer, Hand 7441.55
7535.2200 Pelt, Stitcher 7441.60
7535.9900 Pelt Dressers, Tanners and Fell Mongers, 7441.90
Other
Family 7536 Shoemakers and Related Workers
7536.0100 Shoemaker, Hand 7442.10
7536.0200 Shoemaker, Orthopaedic 7442.12
7536.0300 Shoe Repairer, Cobbler/Shoemaker Cobbler 7442.14
7536.0400 Pattern Maker (Footwear) 7442.16
7536.0500 Cutter, Hand 7442.18
7536.0600 Skiver, Hand (Footwear) 7442.20
7536.0800 Laster, Hand 7442.32
7536.1200 Counter Moulder 7442.45
7536.1500 Sole Stitcher, Hand 7442.60
VOLUME I 186
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7536.1600 Heel Attacher, Hand (Footwear) 7442.65
7536.1700 Trimmer, Hand 7442.70
7536.1800 Harness Maker 7442.72
7536.1900 Saddler 7442.75
7536.2000 Leather Cutter, Hand 7442.76
7536.2100 Stitcher, Hand 7442.78
7536.2200 Assembler, Hand 7442.79
7536.2300 Suitcase Maker 7442.80
7536.2400 Purse Maker 7442.81
7536.2500 Whip Maker 7442.82
7536.2600 Belt Maker 7442.83
7536.2700 Horn Comb Maker (Hand) 7442.85
7536.9900 Shoemaker and Related Workers, Other 7442.90
Group 754 Other Craft and Related Workers
Family 7541 Underwater Divers
7541.0100 Diver, Pearl 6152.30
7541.0200 Diver, Chank 6152.40
7541.0300 Coral Breaker 6152.50
7541.0400 Shell Gatherer 6152.60
7541.0500 Seaweed Gatherer 6152.70
7541.0600 Dress Diver 7216.10
7541.0700 Skin Diver 7216.20
VOLUME I 187
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7541.9900 Underwater Divers, Other 7216.90
Family 7542 Shotfirers and Blasters
7542.0100 Shotfirer 7112.10
7542.0101 Person Handling Explosives
7542.0200 Safety Lamp Checker 7119.10
7542.0300 Cobber, Mica 7119.20
7542.0400 Sickle Dresser, Mica 7119.30
7542.0500 Screener, Mica 7119.40
7542.0600 Knife Dresser, Mica 7119.50
7542.0700 Film Splitter, Mica 7119.60
7542.0800 Deep Cell Attendant 7119.70
7542.9900 Shotfirers and Blasters, Other 7112.90
Family 7543 Product Graders and Testers (Excluding
Food and Beverages)
7543.0101 Cloth Examiner/Fabric Checker 3152.10
7543.0201 QC Executive – Sewing Line
7543.0202 Quality Assessor
7543.0300 Examiner, (Footwear)/Quality Controller 3152.30
7543.0301 Measurement Checker
7543.0302 Inline Checker
7543.0400 Examiner, Dry Cleaning/Fabric Inspection 3152.40
Operator
7543.0500 Examiner, Wood Working 3152.50
VOLUME I 188
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7543.0701 Incoming QC Technician
7543.0702 Final Product QC Technician
7543.0801 Functional Tester
7543.0802 Performance Tester
7543.0803 Reliability Tester
7543.0804 Safety Testing Technician
7543.0901 Functional Tester – Medical Devices
7543.1001 Functional Tester – RAC
7543.1002 Functional Tester – TV
7543.1003 Safety Testing Technician – TV
7543.1004 Safety Testing Technician – RACW
7543.1005 Performance Tester – RACW
7543.1006 Performance Tester – TV
7543.1101 Testing Technician
7543.2001 Quality Inspector – Forged, Casted or
Machined Components
7543.3001 Quality Control Inspector – Calendering
7543.3002 Quality Control Inspector – Dimension
Check
7543.3003 Quality Control Inspector – Extrusion
7543.3004 Quality Control Inspector – Statistical
Process Control
7543.3005 Quality Control Inspector – Visual
Inspection
VOLUME I 189
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
7543.4001 Factory Compliance Auditor
7543.5001 Sampling Co-Ordinator
7543.9900 Product Graders and Testers, Others
Family 7544 Fumigators and Other Pest and Weed
Controllers
Family 7549 Craft and Related Workers Not Elsewhere
Classified
VOLUME I 190
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Division 8 Plant and Machine Operators, and
Assemblers
Sub- 81 Stationary Plant and Machine Operators
Division
Group 811 Mining and Mineral Processing Plant
Operators
Family 8111 Miners and Quarriers
8111.0100 Miner, Coal Cutting Machine 8111.10
8111.0200 Driller, Machine 8111.20
8111.0300 Wagon Driller 8111.30
8111.0400 Diamond Driller 8111.40
8111.0401 Rig Mouted Drill Operator
8111.0500 Pick Miners 7111.10
8111.0600 Miner, Metal 7111.15
8111.0700 Miner, Mica 7111.20
8111.0800 Miner, Coal 7111.25
8111.0900 Quarryman, Stone/Quarryman, Non-Metal 7111.30
8111.1000 Quarryman, Other 7111.35
8111.1100 Main Header Colliery 7111.40
8111.1200 Stone Cutter, Mines 7111.45
8111.1300 Roof Bolter, Mining 7111.47
8111.1400 Mine Cutting and Channelling Machine 7111.49
Operator
8111.1500 Timberman, Mines 7111.50
VOLUME I 191
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8111.1600 Creeperman, Colliery 7111.55
8111.1700 Stowing Worker 7111.60
8111.1800 Packer, Rock 7111.65
8111.1900 Sampler, Mining/Sampler Metal/Non-Metal 7111.68
8111.2000 Groove Cutter, Mining 7111.70
8111.2100 Bratticeman 7111.72
8111.2200 Driller, Hand 7111.74
8111.2300 Shaft Worker 7111.75
8111.2400 Banksman 7111.76
8111.2500 Jackman 7111.77
8111.2600 Scraper Driver, Mines 7111.78
8111.2601 Sprinkler and Other Vehicle Driver
8111.2700 Shovel Operator, Mines 7111.80
8111.2800 Trammer, Mines 7111.85
8111.2901 Wire Saw Operator
8111.9900 Mines, Quarrymen and Related Workers, 7111.90
Other
8112 Mineral and Stone Processing Plant
Operators
Family 8112.0100 Crusher Operator, Mineral 8112.10
8112.0200 Pulveriser Operator 8112.15
8112.0300 Stamp Mill Operator 8112.20
8112.0400 Cynideman 8112.30
VOLUME I 192
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8112.0500 Precipitator 8112.40
8112.0600 Washing Plant Operator 8112.45
8112.0700 Stone Sawyer, Machine 8112.50
8112.0800 Stone Cutter, Machine 8112.55
8112.0900 Stone Polisher, Machine 8112.60
8112.1000 Pipe Machineman, Stoneware 8112.62
8112.1100 Thread Cutting Machine Operator, 8112.65
Stoneware
8112.1200 Cone Operator (Mine & Quarry) 8112.70
8112.9900 Mineral and Stone Processing Plant 8112.90
Operators, Other
Family 8113 Well Drillers and Borers and Related
Workers
8113.0100 Well Drillers, Petroleum and Gas 8113.10
8113.0200 Derrickman 8113.15
8113.0300 Mudman 8113.20
8113.0400 Cementer 8113.25
8113.0500 Well Puller 8113.30
8113.0600 Scaperman 8113.35
8113.0700 Gauger 8113.40
8113.0800 Well Driller, Machine (Other than 8113.45
Petroleum and Gas)
8113.9900 Well Drillers and Borers and Related 8113.90
Workers, Other
VOLUME I 193
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 8114 Cement, Stone and Other Mineral Products
Machine Operators
8114.0100 Polishing Machine Operator (Mosaic) 8212.10
8114.0200 Batching and Mixing Plant Operator 8212.20
(Construction)
8114.0300 Concrete Mixer Operator 8212.30
8114.0500 Cast Stone Maker 8212.50
8114.0600 Lead Brush Maker (Abrasive Wheel) 8212.60
8114.0700 Fettler (Brick & Tile) 8212.70
8114.9900 Cement and Other Mineral Products 8212.90
Machine Operators, Other
Group 812 Metal Processing and Finishing Plant
Operators
Family 8121 Metal Processing Plant Operators
8121.0300 Larry Car Driver, Furnace 8121.20
8121.2300 Shearing and Upcoiler Operator (Non- 8122.36
Ferrous Metal)/Coil Operator
8121.2400 Flattening Machine and Flying Shear 8122.38
Operator (Non-Ferrous Metal)
8121.2500 Slitting Machine Operator (Non-Ferrous 8122.40
Metal)
8121.2700 Roller, Second Hand, Strip Mill (Non-Ferrous 8122.44
Metal)
8121.3000 Charger, Reveraberatory, Pulverised Coal 8122.50
Fired/Reverberatory Furnace Operator
8121.3100 Melter Reveraberatory – Furnace, 8122.52
Pulverised Coal Fired/Reverberatory
VOLUME I 194
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Furnace Operator
8121.3300 Slag Flusher 8122.56
8121.3301 Casting or Foundry Assistant/Helper
8121.3701 Heat Treating Furnace Operator 8122.64
8121.3801 Assistant Casting Technician
8121.4200 Die Casting Machine Operator 8122.74
8121.4201 Pressure Die Casting (PDC) Operator
8121.4300 Casting Machine Operator (Non-Ferrous 8122.76
Metal)
8121.4400 Casting – Operator Helper (Non-Ferrous 8122.77
Metal)
8121.4500 Spun Pipe Machine Operator 8122.78
8121.4600 Core Maker, Machine 8122.80
8121.4700 Annealer, Metal 8123.10
8121.4800 Hardener, Metal 8123.20
8121.4900 Temperer, Metal 8123.30
8121.5200 Looper, Metal Drawing 8124.15
8121.5500 Seamless Pipe and Tube Drawers 8124.40
8121.5600 Extrusion Press Operator 8124.50
8121.5800 Metal Drawing Operatives 8124.90
8121.9900 Metal Processing Plant Operators, Other 8124.70
Family 8122 Metal Finishing, Plating and Coating
Machine Operators
VOLUME I 195
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8122.0100 Electroplater 8223.10
8122.0101 Surface Treatment Technician
8122.2000 Enameller, Chemical 8223.20
8122.3000 Reeling Machine Operator 8223.30
8122.3500 Galvanizer/Operator – Electroplating, 8223.35
Galvanising
8122.5500 Metal Sprayer 8223.55
8122.6000 Sample Checker, Metal Making 8223.60
8122.6200 Shot Blaster 8223.62
8122.6700 Picker 8223.67
8122.6900 Hardness Tester, Metal 8223.69
8122.7000 Speeder Machine Operator (Abrasive 8223.70
Wheel)
8122.7100 Sizing Machine Operator (Abrasive Wheel) 8223.71
8122.7200 Abrasive Coated Cloth and Papermaker 8223.72
8122.7300 Skiving Machine Operator (Abrasive) 8223.73
8122.7400 Belt Press Operator (Abrasive) 8223.74
8122.7500 Roll Winding Machine Operator (Abrasive) 8223.75
8122.7600 Sheet Cutter (Abrasive) 8223.76
8122.7700 Slitting Machine Operator (Abrasive) 8223.77
8122.7800 Clicker Press Operator (Abrasive) 8223.78
8122.7900 Splint Feeder (Match) 8223.79
8122.8000 Splint Drying Chamberman (Match) 8223.80
VOLUME I 196
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8122.8100 Levelling Machine Attendant (Match) 8223.81
8122.9900 Metal Finishing, Plating and Coating 8223.90
Machine Operators, Other
Group 813 Chemical and Photographic Products Plant
and Machine Operators
Family 8131 Chemical Products Plant and Machine
Operators
8131.0100 Crusher Operator, Chemical 8151.10
8131.0200 Miller/Mill Operator (Chemical) 8151.20
8131.0300 Pulveriser Operator, Chemical 8151.30
8131.0400 Mixing Machineman Attendant (Chemical) 8151.40
8131.0500 Compounding Man (Match) 8151.45
8131.0800 Sieving Machine Attendant, Chemical 8151.60
8131.0900 Grading Machine Attendant (Abrasive) 8151.65
8131.1400 Drying Chamber Attendant 8152.30
(Drugs)/Chamber Operators
8131.1500 Drying Chamber Attendant (Match 8152.35
Boxes)/Chamber Operators
8131.1700 Size Maker (Abrasive) 8152.45
8131.1800 Paste Maker 8152.50
8131.2100 Ammonia Operator/Ammonia Plant 8152.70
Operator
8131.2200 Heat Treater 8152.75
8131.2300 Filter Press Operator 8153.10
8131.2400 Filter Press Operator (Ceramics) 8153.15
VOLUME I 197
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8131.2500 Strainer, Liquid 8153.20
8131.2600 Box Filtration Operator 8153.30
8131.2700 Hydro Extractor Operator 8153.40
8131.2800 Crude Oil Treater (Oil Field) 8153.50
8131.2900 Gauger (Cement) 8153.60
8131.3000 Disc Operator (Abrasive) 8153.65
8131.3100 Crude Oil Treater (Petrol & Gas) 8153.70
8131.3200 Brine Maker (Chemical) 8153.80
8131.3501 Autoclave Operator 8154.30
8131.3600 Evaporator Operator 8154.40
8131.3700 Reactor Convertor Operator 8154.50
8131.3800 Converter Operator (Grain Feed Mills) 8154.60
8131.3900 Distiller (Chemical) 8154.65
8131.4000 Continuous Machine Operator (Match Box 8222.10
Manufacturing)
8131.4100 Receiver (Match) 8222.20
8131.4200 Box Making Machine Operator (Match) 8222.30
8131.4300 Box Filling Machine Operator (Match) 8222.40
8131.4400 Friction Machine Operator (Match) 8222.50
8131.4500 Box Closing Machine Operator (Match) 8222.60
8131.4600 Bandroll and Labelling Machine Operator 8222.70
8131.4900 Coke Oven Operator, Controller 8159.12
VOLUME I 198
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8131.5600 Charcoal Burner, Beehive Kiln (Chemical) 8159.25
8131.5800 Producer Gas Plant Operator 8159.28
8131.5900 Bale Cutter Operator, Rubber 8159.34
8131.6000 Masticator, Rubber 8159.36
8131.6100 Straining Operator (Rubber Reclaim) 8159.38
8131.6200 Mixer, Rubber/Mill Operator 8159.40
8131.6300 Solution and Dough Making, Operator, 8159.42
Rubber
8131.6400 Synthetic Fibre Maker 8159.45
8131.6500 Refining Machine Operator (Oils and 8159.54
Fats)/Oil and Fat Plant Operator
8131.6600 Hydrogenation Operator (Oil & Fats)/Oil 8159.56
and Fat Plant Operator
8131.6700 Deodorizer 8159.58
8131.6800 Crystallisation Attendant 8159.60
8131.7000 Tablet Machine Operator 8159.62
8131.7100 Tablet Coater 8159.64
8131.7200 Ampoule Machine/Plant Operator 8159.66
8131.7500 M.B. Tester 8159.72
8131.7600 Optical Examiner, Ampoules 8159.74
8131.7700 Acid Plant Operator 8159.76
8131.7800 Sulphur Burner 8159.78
8131.8000 Acid Concentrator 8159.80
VOLUME I 199
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8131.8100 Acid Worker, Other 8159.82
8131.8200 Cell Room Attendant, Chemical 8159.84
8131.8300 Gas Storage Attendant 8159.86
8131.8400 Soap Machine Attendant 8159.87
8131.8500 Extraction Attendant, Chemical 8159.88
8131.8700 Laboratory Attendant 8229.10
8131.8800 Agarbatti Maker 8229.20
8131.8900 Pencil Maker 8229.30
8131.9000 Assembler, Marking Devices (Pen & Pencil) 8229.40
8131.9900 Chemical Products Machine Operators, 8229.90
Other
Family 8132 Photographic Products Machine Operators
8132.0100 Printer Photographic 7344.10
8132.0200 Developer, Photographic 7344.20
8132.0300 Developer, Automatic (Photofinishing) 7344.25
8132.0400 Enlarger, Photographic 7344.30
8132.0500 Retoucher, Photographic 7344.40
8132.0600 Photographic Dark Room Operatives 7344.50
8132.0700 Printing Machine Operator, Photographic 8224.10
8132.0800 Film Developing Machine Operator 8224.20
8132.0900 Photographic Film and Papermaker 8224.30
8132.1000 Linoleum Maker 8224.40
VOLUME I 200
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8132.9900 Photographic Products Machine Operators, 8224.90
Other
Group 814 Rubber, Plastic and Paper Products
Machine Operators
Family 8141 Rubber Products Machine Operators
8141.0100 Calendar Machine Operator 8231.10
8141.0101 Pre- and Post-Calendering Operator
8141.0200 Cord Dipping Operator 8231.15
8141.0300 Extruding Machine Operator (Rubber) 8231.20
8141.0301 Feed Extruder Operator
8141.0302 Tube Extruder Operator
8141.0400 Rubber Fabric Cutting Machine Operator 8231.25
8141.0500 Slitting Machine Operator (Cycle Tyre) 8231.30
8141.0600 Bead Maker (Rubber Tyre) 8231.35
8141.0700 Profiling Operator (Cycle Tyre) 8231.40
8141.0711 Continuous Curing Operator
8141.0712 Roto Curing Operator
8141.0713 Injection Moulding Operator
8141.0714 Transfer Moulding Operator
8141.0715 Internal Mixer Operator
8141.0716 Kneader Operator
8141.0800 Finishing Operator (Rubber Tyre) 8231.45
8141.0900 Sealing and Valve Fitting Operator 8231.50
VOLUME I 201
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8141.1000 Finishing Operator (Rubber Tube) 8231.60
8141.1100 Sheet Maker (Rubber) 8231.65
8141.1201 Moulder (Rubber)/Compression Moulding 8231.67
Operator
8141.1301 Calenderer Rubberised Fabric/Operator- 8231.70
Textile Coating
8141.1400 Hose Maker (Rubber Goods) 8231.72
8141.1500 Latex Worker 8231.74
8141.1600 Latex Foam Cushion Maker 8231.76
8141.1701 Tyre Builder/Radial Building Operator 8231.80
8141.1702 Tyre Building Operator – Commercial
Vehicles
8141.1703 Tyre Building Operator – Passenger Vehicles
8141.1800 Tyre Moulder 8231.81
8141.1801 Tyre Moulding Operator
8141.1900 Band Builder (Tyre Building) 8231.83
8141.2000 Trimmer (Tyre Building) 8231.84
8141.2100 Tyre Repairer 8231.85
8141.2200 Moulder, Rubber Tube 8231.86
8141.2300 Cycle Tube Reverser 8231.87
8141.2400 Rubber Stamp Maker 8231.88
8141.9900 Rubber and Rubberised Product Makers, 8231.90
Other
Family 8142 Plastic Products Machine Operators
VOLUME I 202
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8142.0100 Tablet Machine Operator 8232.10
8142.0200 Laminating Press Operator (Plastic) 8232.15
8142.0300 Extruding Machine Setter (Plastic) 8232.18
8142.0400 Extruding Machine Operator (Plastic) 8232.20
8142.0501 Injection Moulding Machine Operator 8232.25
(Plastic)
8142.0502 Moulding Operator
8142.0503 Encapsulation Operator
8142.0600 Compression Moulding Machine Operator 8232.30
(Plastic)
8142.0700 Bottle Blowing Machine Operator (Plastic) 8232.35
8142.0800 Vacuum Plastic Forming Machine Operator 8232.40
8142.0900 Embossing Machine Setter (Plastic) 8232.45
8142.1000 Embossing Machine Operator (Plastic) 8232.50
8142.1100 Printing Machine Operator (Plastic) 8232.60
8142.1200 Button Maker 8232.62
8142.1300 Mould Setter (Plastic) 8232.65
8142.1301 Plastic Moulding Technician or Operator
8142.1400 Moulder, Hand (Plastic) 8232.70
8142.1500 Cementer (Plastic) 8232.75
8142.1600 Plastic Fabricator 8232.80
8142.9900 Plastic Products Making Operatives, Other 8232.90
Family 8143 Paper Products Machine Operators
VOLUME I 203
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8143.0100 Cardboard Box Maker 8253.10
8143.0200 Envelope Maker, Machine 8253.20
8143.0300 Cellophane Bag Maker, Machine 8253.30
8143.0400 Flower Maker, Paper 8253.40
8143.0500 Papier Mache Moulder 8253.50
8143.9900 Paper Product Makers, Other 8253.90
Group 815 Textile, Fur and Leather Products Machine
Operators
Family 8151 Fibre Preparing, Spinning and Winding
Machine Operators
8151.0100 Garnett Machineman, Woollen 8261.10
8151.0300 Rag Machineman (Woollen Textile) 8261.20
8151.0400 Doubling Machine Operator (Textile) 8261.25
8151.0500 Combing Tenter 8261.30
8151.0600 Spinner, Frame (Textile)/Ring Frame Tenter 8261.35
8151.0700 Drawing Tenter 8261.40
8151.1000 Reeler Textile 8261.70
8151.1100 Reed Man 8261.77
8151.1200 Healdman (Textile) 8261.79
8151.1300 Reeler, Silk 8261.80
8151.1400 Yarn Tester 8261.81
8151.1500 Warping Boy (Textile)/Wrapper 8261.82
8151.1600 Pin Setter (Textile) 8261.83
VOLUME I 204
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8151.1700 Roller Coverer 8261.84
8151.1800 Winder Textile/Winding Operator 8261.85
8151.1900 Size Mixer (Textile) 8261.86
8151.2000 Waterproofer, Textile 8261.87
8151.2100 Weighter, Silk 8261.88
8151.2200 Fetler (Woollen Textile) 8261.89
8151.9900 Fibre Preparing, Spinning and Winding 8261.90
Machine Operators, Other
Family 8152 Weaving and Knitting Machine Operators
8152.0100 Drawing Man 7432.10
8152.0200 Doffer, Fly Frame/Speed Frame Operator 7432.12
8152.0300 Knitting Jobber 8262.10
8152.0400 Card Cutter 8262.20
8152.0500 Mat Shearing Operator 8262.25
8152.0600 Flat Knitter, Machine/Knitting Machine 8262.30
Operator – Flat Knitting
8152.0700 Sock Knitter/Knitting Machine Operator – 8262.35
Socks Knitting
8152.0800 Sock Knitter, Automatic Machine 8262.40
8152.0900 Knitter, Machine/Knitting Machine 8262.45
Operator
8152.1000 Looperman, Hosiery 8262.50
8152.1100 Warp Knitter/Knitting Machine Operator – 8262.55
Warp Knitter
VOLUME I 205
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8152.1200 Weaver, Lace (Machine) 8262.60
8152.1300 Braid Maker, Machine/Braiding Machine 8262.65
Operator
8152.1400 Lace Maker (Machine) 8262.70
8152.1600 Warp Tying Machineman 8262.80
8152.1700 Wrapper 8262.81
8152.2000 Front Sizer (Cotton Textile) 8262.85
8152.2100 Back Sizer 8262.86
8152.9900 Weaving and Knitting Machine Operators, 8262.90
Other
Family 8153 Sewing Machine Operators
8153.0101 Sewing Machine Operator, General 8263.10
8153.0102 Stitcher (Leather Goods and Garments)
8153.0103 Specialized Sewing Machine Operator
8153.0200 Button Hole Maker, Machine 8263.20
8153.0300 Eyelet Holing Machine Operator 8263.30
8153.0400 Button Stitching Machine Operator 8263.40
8153.0500 Embroider, Machine 8263.45
8153.0600 Embroidery Machine Operator (Semi- 8263.50
Automatic)
8153.0601 Embroidery Machine Operator (Zig Zag
Machine)
8153.0701 Framer – Computerised Embroidery
Machine
VOLUME I 206
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8153.0702 Helper – Parts Making (Leather Goods and
Garments)
8153.0703 Helper – Finishing Operations (Leather
Goods and Garments)
8153.9900 Sewers and Embroiders, Other 8263.90
Family 8154 Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning Machine
Operators
8154.0200 Kierman (Textile)/Package Dyeing Machine 8264.50
Operator
8154.0300 Scouringman, Woollen Yarn 8264.55
8154.0500 Washing Machineman 8264.60
8154.0600 De-Gummer, Silk 8264.62
8154.0700 Carbonizer, Textile 8264.64
8154.0800 Scutcherman, Bleaching 8264.66
8154.0900 Dyed- Yarn Operator (Textile) 8264.67
8154.1000 Jiggerman (Cotton Textile)/Jigger Machine 8264.68
Operator
8154.1100 Dye Automation Operator (Textile)/ Dyeing 8264.69
Machine Operator
8154.1200 Wool Dyer 8264.70
8154.1500 Dyer Garment 8264.75
8154.1700 Damping Machine Attendant 8264.77
8154.1800 Calenderman (Cotton Textile) 8264.78
8154.1900 Miller 8264.79
8154.2000 Raising Machineman (Textile) 8264.80
VOLUME I 207
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8154.2100 Stentering Machineman/Stentering 8264.81
Operator
8154.2200 Cropper 8264.82
8154.2300 Padding Machineman/Padding Mangle 8264.83
Operator
8154.2400 Brushing Machineman (Textile) 8264.84
8154.2500 Crabbing Machineman (Woollen Textile) 8264.85
8154.2600 Sanforizing Machineman 8264.86
8154.2700 Singeing Machineman/Singeing Machine 8264.87
Operator
8154.9900 Bleaching, Dyeing and Cleaning Machine 8264.90
Operators, Other
Family 8155 Fur and Leather Preparing Machine
Operators
8155.0100 Dehairer, Machine/Dehairer Machine 8265.10
Operator
8155.0201 Flesher, Machine/Fleshing Operator 8265.20
8155.0300 Scudder, Machine/Scudding Machine 8265.25
Operator
8155.0400 Hide and Skin Setter, Machine/Setting 8265.30
Machine Operator
8155.0500 Hide Splitter, Machine/Splitting Machine 8265.32
Operator
8155.0501 Splitting and Sammying Operator (Leather)
8155.0601 Hide Shaver, Machine/Shaving Operator 8265.35
8155.0700 Staker, Machine/Staking Machine Operator 8265.40
VOLUME I 208
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8155.0801 Leather Buffer, Machine/Buffing Operator 8265.45
8155.0900 Leather Glazer, Machine/Glazing Machine 8265.50
Operator
8155.1000 Rolling Machine Operator (Leather) 8265.60
8155.1101 Tanner, Rotary Drum, Continuous Process 8265.70
(Leather Manufacturing)/Drum Operator
8155.1102 Post Tanning Machine Operator
8155.1200 Leather Measuring Machine 8265.80
Man/Measuring Machine Operator
8155.1201 Helper – Wet Operations (Multi-Skilled)
8155.1202 Helper – Dry Operations (Finished Leather)
8155.1203 Helper – Finishing Operation(Finished
Leather)
8155.9900 Fur And Leather Preparing Machine 8265.90
Operators, Other
Family 8156 Shoe Making and Related Machine
Operators
8156.0100 Pounding Machine Operator (Footwear) 8266.10
8156.0200 Heel Breaster, Machine 8266.12
(Footwear)/Machine Operator – Heel
Breasting
8156.0400 Heel Builder, Machine (Footwear)/Machine 8266.16
Operator – Heel Building
8156.0500 Sole Rounding Machine Operator 8266.18
8156.0600 Nailer, Machine/Machine Operator, Nailing 8266.20
8156.0701 Cutter, Machine/Cutter (Footwear) 8266.22
VOLUME I 209
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8156.0800 Leather Cutter, Machine 8266.23
8156.0900 Welt Sewer, Machine/Machine Operator, 8266.25
Welt Sewing
8156.0901 Stitching Operator (Footwear)
8156.1001 Skiver, Machine/Skiving Operator 8266.26
8156.1401 Laster, Machine/Lasting Operator 8266.32
8156.1500 Sole Stitcher, Machine 8266.35
8156.1600 Seat Laster, Machine/Lasting Machine 8266.36
Operator
8156.1700 Splitter, Machine/Splitting Machine 8266.38
Operator
8156.1800 Heeler, Machine/Heel Attacher 8266.40
8156.1900 Heel Compressor, Machine (Footwear) 8266.42
8156.2000 Sole Leveller, Machine 8266.45
8156.2100 Trimmer, Machine 8266.50
8156.2200 Edge Setter, Machine 8266.55
8156.2300 Edge Burnisher 8266.60
8156.2400 Heel Padding Machine Operator 8266.65
8156.2500 Eyeleting Machine Operator 8266.68
8156.2501 Pre-Assembly Operator
8156.2600 Riveting Machine Operator 8266.70
8156.2601 Helper – Bottom Making (Footwear)
8156.2602 Helper – Upper Making (Footwear)
VOLUME I 210
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8156.2603 Helper – Finishing (Footwear)
8156.9900 Cutting, Lasting and Sewing Machine 8266.90
Operators, Other
Family 8157 Laundry Machine Operators
8157.0100 Washing Machine Operator 8264.10
8157.0200 Drying Machine Operator 8264.20
8157.0300 Dry Cleaner, Machine 8264.30
8157.0400 Presser, Machine/Ironing Operator 8264.40
8157.0401 Pressman
Family 8159 Textile, Fur and Leather Products Machine
Operators Not Elsewhere Classified
8159.0100 Folder, Machine/Folding Machine Operator 8269.10
8159.0200 Splicing – Machine Operator, Automatic 8269.20
(Textile)
8159.0300 Balling – Machine Operator (Textile) 8269.30
8159.0400 Press Operator 8269.40
8159.9900 Leather Cutters, Lasters and Sewers and 8269.90
Related Machine Operators, Other
Group 816 Food and Related Products Machine
Operators
Family 8160 Food and Related Products Machine
Operators
8160.0300 Pasteurising Plant Operator (Dairy) 8272.10
8160.0400 Mixing Tank Operator 8272.20
8160.0500 Dairy Processing Equipment Operator 8272.30
VOLUME I 211
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8160.0700 Miller, Food Grains 8273.10
8160.0800 Husker, Machine (Food Grains) 8273.20
8160.0900 Rollerman, (Food Grains) 8273.30
8160.1000 Flour Mill Operator 8273.40
8160.1100 Siever, Machine 8273.50
8160.1200 Oil Crusher Operator, Power 8273.60
8160.1300 Filter Press Operator (Oil) 8273.65
8160.1500 Wafer Baking Machine Operator (Baking) 8274.10
8160.1600 Cooker Operator 8274.20
8160.1700 Cutting Machine Operator (Confectionery) 8274.30
8160.1800 Chocolate Maker, Helper 8274.40
8160.1900 Flake Miller, Wheat and Oats (Grain-Feed 8274.50
Mills)
8160.2000 Noodle Press Operator 8274.60
8160.2200 Peeling Machine Operator (Food Canning 8275.10
and Preserving)
8160.2300 Pitting Machine Operator (Food Canning 8275.20
and Preserving)
8160.2400 Fruit Press Operator (Food Canning and 8275.30
Preserving)
8160.2500 Seaming Machine Operator (Food Canning 8275.40
and Preserving)
8160.2600 Retort Operator (Food Canning and 8275.45
Preserving)
8160.2700 Processing Man (Food Canning and 8275.50
VOLUME I 212
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Preserving)
8160.2800 Panman (Food Canning and Preserving) 8275.55
8160.2900 Exhaust Box Operator (Food Canning and 8275.60
Preserving)
8160.3000 Foodstuff Freezer 8275.65
8160.3100 Peanut Blancher 8275.70
8160.3200 Dehydrator Tender (Canning & 8275.72
Preservation)
8160.3300 Refining – Machine Operator (Oil & Grease) 8275.74
8160.3400 Crusher Operator, Sugarcane 8276.10
8160.3500 Filter Pressman 8276.20
8160.3600 Dorr Clarifier Operator 8276.30
8160.3700 Evaporator Operator, Sugar 8276.40
8160.3800 Panman, Sugar 8276.50
8160.3900 Crystalizerman 8276.60
8160.4000 Centrifugal Man 8276.65
8160.4100 Magmaman 8276.70
8160.4200 Cutter Driver 8276.71
8160.4300 Cane Carrier Driver, Mill House 8276.72
8160.4400 Raw Juice Tank Pump Attendant 8276.73
8160.4500 Juice Measuring Man 8276.74
8160.4600 Lime Juice Tank Attendant 8276.75
8160.4700 Juice Heater Man 8276.76
VOLUME I 213
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8160.4800 Juice Heater Helper 8276.77
8160.4900 Carbonation Man 8276.78
8160.5000 Carbonation Storage Tank Attendant 8276.79
8160.5100 Sulphitation Man, Sugar 8276.80
8160.5200 Eliminator Attendant, Sugar 8276.81
8160.5300 Settling Tank Man, Sugar 8276.82
8160.5400 Works Poor Attendant 8276.83
8160.5500 Gur Maker 8276.85
8160.5700 Tea Maker 8277.10
8160.5800 Withering Loft Attendant (Tea) 8277.15
8160.5900 Roller Attendant 8277.20
8160.6000 Pulp Houseman (Coffee) 8277.25
8160.6100 Peeling Machine Attendant (Coffee) 8277.30
8160.6200 Firing Machine Attendant (Tea) 8277.35
8160.6300 Tea Blender 8277.40
8160.6400 Coffee Blender 8277.45
8160.6500 Coffee Roaster 8277.50
8160.6600 Roaster, Cocoa Bean 8277.60
8160.6800 Brew Master 8278.10
8160.6900 Malt Maker 8278.12
8160.7000 Masher 8278.14
8160.7100 Fermentation Man 8278.16
VOLUME I 214
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8160.7200 Yeast Maker 8278.18
8160.7300 Malt Vinegar Maker 8278.20
8160.7400 Filterman 8278.25
8160.7500 Pasteuriser, Brewery 8278.30
8160.7600 Syrup Plant Operator 8278.35
8160.7700 Syrup Maker 8278.40
8160.7800 Syrup Mixing Plant Operator 8278.45
8160.7900 Syruper 8278.47
8160.8000 Bottling Plant In-Charge 8278.50
8160.8100 Bottle Washer, Machine 8278.55
8160.8200 Carbonator Machine Attendant 8278.60
8160.8300 Filler, Aerated Water 8278.65
8160.8400 Filler, Aerated Water, Hand Machine 8278.70
8160.8600 Drier and Cooler Operator, Tobacco 8279.30
8160.8700 Cutting Machine Operator, Tobacco 8279.40
8160.8800 Cigarette Making Machine Operator 8279.50
8160.8900 Stingy Cigarette Slitting Machine Operator 8279.60
8160.9900 Food and Related Products Machine
Operators
Group 817 Wood Processing and Papermaking Plant
Operators
Family 8171 Pulp and Papermaking Plant Operators
8171.0100 Chipperman, Paper Pulp 8142.10
VOLUME I 215
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8171.0200 Grinder, Paper Pulp 8142.15
8171.0400 Sorter, Paper Pulp 8142.25
8171.0500 Cutter, Paper Pulp 8142.30
8171.0600 Liquor Maker, Paper Pulp 8142.35
8171.0800 Causticman, Paper Pulp/Causticizing 8142.45
Operator
8171.0900 Bleacher, Paper Pulp 8142.50
8171.1100 Agitator, Paper Pulp 8142.60
8171.1200 Machine Operator, Paper 8143.10
8171.1400 Wire Boy, Paper 8143.20
8171.1600 Cutter, Paper 8143.30
8171.1700 Finisher, Paper 8143.35
8171.1800 Vat Man, Handmade Paper 8143.40
8171.1900 Transferor, Handmade Paper 8143.45
8171.2000 Tub-Sizer, Handmade Paper 8143.50
8171.2100 Drier, Handmade Paper 8143.55
8171.2200 Presser, Handmade Paper 8143.60
8171.2400 Calenderman, Handmade Paper 8143.70
8171.2500 Coating Machine Operator, Hardboard 8143.80
(Paper Goods)
8171.9900 Pulp and Papermaking Plant Operators, 8143.90
Other
Family 8172 Wood Processing Plant Operators
VOLUME I 216
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8172.0100 Wood Sawyer, Machine, General 8141.10
8172.0200 Wood Sawyer, Edger 8141.20
8172.0300 Band Saw Operator 8141.25
8172.0400 Circular Saw Operator 8141.30
8172.0700 Veneer Cutter 8141.55
8172.0800 Peeling Machine Operator 8141.60
8172.0900 Barrel-Lathe Operator, Outside (Wood 8141.62
Container)
8172.1000 Wood Chopping Machine Operator 8141.65
8172.1100 Core Laying Machine Operator 8141.70
8172.1200 Core Layer, Plywood 8141.75
8172.9900 Wood Processing Plant Operators and 8141.90
Related Workers, Other
Group 818 Other Stationary Plant and Machine
Operators
Family 8181 Glass and Ceramics Plant Operators
8181.0100 Blowing Machine Operator (Glass) 8131.10
8181.0200 Machineman, Sheet Glass 8131.15
8181.0300 Pressman (Glass) 8131.20
8181.0400 Pressman (Ceramics) 8131.22
8181.0500 Extruding Press Operator, Clay 8131.23
8181.0600 Rollerman (Glass) 8131.25
8181.0700 Pressman (Abrasive) 8131.28
VOLUME I 217
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8181.0800 Tube and Rod Drawer (Glass) 8131.30
8181.1000 Polisher (Glass Manufacturing) 8131.37
8181.1100 Modeller, Pottery and Porcelain 8131.40
8181.1200 Furnace Man, Glass/Furnace Operator 8131.50
8181.1400 Annealer (Glass Product) 8131.65
8181.1500 Kiln Man, Pottery and Porcelain 8131.70
8181.1600 Kiln Loader, Pottery and Porcelain 8131.72
8181.1700 Kiln Man, Brick and Tile 8131.75
8181.1800 Kiln Loader, Brick and Tile 8131.77
8181.1900 Bricklayer (Brick & Tile) 8131.79
8181.2000 Graduating Machine Operator (Glass) 8131.80
8181.2100 Batch Mixer (Glass) 8139.10
8181.2200 Abrasive Mixer 8139.15
8181.2300 Mixing Machine Operator (Abrasive) 8139.20
8181.2400 Ball Mill Operator (Cement & Ceramics) 8139.30
8181.2500 Pug Mill Operator (Ceramics) 8139.40
8181.2600 Shaving Machine Operator (Abrasive) 8139.50
8181.2700 Slip Maker (Ceramics) 8139.60
8181.2800 Glaze Maker 8139.65
8181.2900 Edge Operator (Abrasive) 8139.70
8181.3000 Wet Disk Operator (Abrasive) 8139.75
8181.3100 Burner Cement 8139.80
VOLUME I 218
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8181.3200 Clay Modeller 8139.82
8181.3300 Fiberglass – Machine Operator 8139.85
8181.3400 Furnace Helper
8181.9900 Glass and Ceramics Plant Operators, Other 8139.90
Family 8182 Steam Engine and Boiler Operators
8182.0100 Boiler, Tindal 8162.10
8182.0200 Boiler, Attendant 8162.20
8182.0300 Boiler, Fireman 8162.30
8182.0400 Boiler House Operatives 8162.40
8182.0500 Serang, Engine Room/Engine Bosun 8162.50
8182.0600 Tindal, Engine Room 8162.60
8182.0800 Fireman, Locomotive 8162.75
8182.9900 Ships’ Engine Room Ratings, Other 8162.90
Family 8183 Packing, Bottling and Labelling Machine
Operators
8183.0100 Building Insulator, Machine 8290.30
Family 8189 Gem and Jewellery Machine Operators
8189.0100 Gem Grinder, Machine 8290.50
8189.0200 Gem Polisher, Machine 8290.60
8189.0301 CAM Machine Operator
8189.0401 Laser Sawing Machine Operator
8189.0405 Blade Sawyer
VOLUME I 219
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8189.0501 Casting Machine Operator
8189.0601 Symmetry Analyser Machine Operator
8189.0701 Pantograph Machine Operator 7313.72
8190.0100 Saw Grinder, Machine 8290.40
Sub- 82 Assemblers
Division
Group 821 Assemblers
Family 8211 Mechanical Machinery Assemblers
8211.0100 Assembler, Workshop Machine and 8281.10
Equipment
8211.0101 Mechanical Sub-Assembly Technician
8211.0200 Assembler Printing Machinery 8281.15
8211.0300 Assembler, Textile Machinery 8281.20
8211.0400 Assembler, Refrigerator and Air- 8281.25
Conditioning Unit
8211.0500 Assembler, Stationary Petrol Engine 8281.30
8211.0600 Assembler, Stationary Diesel Engine 8281.35
8211.0700 Assembler, Tractor 8281.40
8211.0800 Assembler, Turbine and Steam Engine 8281.45
8211.0900 Assembler Loco Engines 8281.50
8211.1000 Erector, Machine and Equipment 8281.55
8211.1100 Assembler, Continuity 8281.60
8211.1200 Assembler, Automobile 8281.65
VOLUME I 220
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8211.1201 Vehicle Assembly Fitter
8211.1202 Fitter-Mechanical Assembly
8211.1300 Assembler, Motor Cycle 8281.70
8211.1400 Assembler, Frame, Aircraft 8281.75
Family 8212 Electrical and Electronic Equipment
Assemblers
8212.0100 Battery Assembler 8282.10
8212.0200 Assembler Dry Cell (Battery Manufacturing) 8282.20
8212.0300 Battery Repairer 8282.30
8212.0400 Assembler, Electrical Accessories 8282.40
8212.0401 Cutting, Crimping and Connector Assembly
Operator
8212.0402 Electrical Assembly Operator
8212.0500 Electric Motor Winder 8282.50
8212.0600 Calibrator, Electrical 8282.60
8212.0700 Assembler Precision Instrument 8283.10
8212.0800 Assembly Operator (Telephone Equipment 8283.20
Manufacturing)
8212.0900 Assembly Operator (Radio Manufacturing) 8283.30
8212.1000 Form Layer, Cable (Telephone Equipment 8283.40
Manufacturing)
8212.1100 Cable Maker, Rack Wiring (Telephone & 8283.50
Telegraph Equipment Manufacturing)
8212.1200 Operator, Rack Wiring (Telephone & 8283.60
Telegraph Equipment Manufacturing)
VOLUME I 221
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8212.1301 RAC Assembly Operator
8212.1401 Assembly Operator – TV
8212.1501 Mechanical Assembly Operator
8212.1601 Manual Insertion Operation
8212.1602 Through Hole Assembly Operator
8212.1603 Pick and Place Assembly Operator
8212.1604 Reflow Oven Soldering Operator
8212.1605 Stencil Printing Operator
8212.1606 Component Preparation Operator
8212.1607 Box-Building Assembly Technician
8212.1701 Wire Bonding Operator
8212.1702 Die Bonding Operator
8212.1801 Assembly Operator Capacitor
8212.1802 Winding Operator
8212.1803 Vacuum Plant Operator
8212.1804 Coating, Curing and Marking Operator
8212.1805 Masking Machine Operator
8212.1806 Pressing Machine Operator
8212.1807 Manual Soldering Technician
8212.1808 Wave Soldering Machine Operator
8212.1901 Welding Operator
8212.1902 Silicone Painting Operator
VOLUME I 222
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8212.1903 Sorting Operator
8212.1904 Capping Machine Operator
8212.2001 Energy Meter Assembly Operator
8212.2002 PLC Assembly Operator
8212.2003 UPS Assembly Operator
8212.2101 Final Assembly Operator-Magnetics
8212.2201 Assembly Operator – PMD and X-Ray
8212.2202 Box Assembly Operator
8212.2301 Module Soldering Operator
8212.2302 Module Assembly Technician
8212.2401 Electrical Technician
8212.2501 Inner Layer and Pressing Operator
8212.2502 Drilling Operator
8212.2503 Routing Operator
8212.2504 Solder Masking & Legend Printing Operator
8212.2601 Electronic Sub-Assembly Technician
8212.2701 PCB Assembly Operator
8212.9900 Electrical and Electronic Equipment 8283.90
Assemblers, Other
Family 8219 Assemblers Not Elsewhere Classified
8219.0100 Assembler, Bicycle 8284.10
8219.0200 Assembler, Sewing Machine 8284.20
VOLUME I 223
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8219.0300 Assembler (Plastic Product) 8284.30
8219.0400 Assembler, Metal Furniture 8284.40
8219.9900 Paper Board, Textile and Related Products 8286.90
Assemblers, Other
Sub- 83 Drivers and Mobile Plant Operators
Division
Group 831 Locomotive Engine Drivers and Related
Workers
Family 8311 Locomotive Engine Drivers
8311.0100 Loco Driver, Mines 8311.10
8311.0200 Driver, Railway Engine (Steam) 8311.20
8311.0300 Driver, Railway Engine (Diesel) 8311.30
8311.0400 Driver, Railway Engine (Electrical) 8311.40
8311.0500 Driver, Shunting (Loco) 8311.50
8311.0601 Locomotive Driver
Family 8312 Railway Braker, Signal and Switch
Operators
8312.0100 Signalman, Railway 8312.10
8312.0200 Shunting Worker 8312.20
8312.0300 Points Man, Railway 8312.30
8312.0400 Traffic Shunter, Railway 8312.40
8312.0500 Braker, Passenger Train 8312.50
8312.9900 Pointsmen, Signalmen and Shunters, 8312.90
Railways, Other
VOLUME I 224
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Group 832 Car, Van and Motorcycle Drivers
Family 8321 Motorcycle Drivers
8321.0101 Driver Auto Rickshaw 8321.10
8321.0200 Despatch Rider 8321.20
8321.0201 Delivery Associate/Two Wheeler Delivery
Associate
8321.9900 Motorcycle Drivers, Other 8321.90
Family 8322 Car, Taxi and Van Drivers
8322.0100 Driver, Car 8322.10
8322.0101 Chauffer, Driver Personal
8322.0102 Chauffer, Cab Driver
8322.0201 Driver, Taxi 8322.20
8322.0301 Driver, Ambulance 8322.30
8322.0501 Light Motor Vehicle Driver
8322.9900 Car, Taxi and Van Drivers, Other 8322.90
Group 833 Heavy Truck and Bus Drivers
Family 8331 Bus and Tram Drivers
8331.0100 Tram Car Driver 8323.10
8331.0200 Trolley Driver 8323.20
8331.0300 Driver, Bus 8323.30
8331.0301 Commercial Vehicle Driver
8331.0302 Commercial Vehicle Driver – Assistant
VOLUME I 225
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8331.0400 Driver, Fire Brigade Vehicles 8323.40
8331.0500 Driver Road Test 8323.50
8331.0501 Test Driver
8331.0600 Signalman, Tram 8323.60
8331.9900 Bus and Tram Drivers, Other 8323.90
Family 8332 Heavy Truck and Lorry Drivers
8332.0100 Driver Truck 8324.10
8332.0200 Tram Car Driver (Mines) 8324.20
8332.9900 Heavy Truck and Lorry Drivers, Other 8324.90
Group 834 Mobile Plant Operators
Family 8341 Mobile Farm and Forestry Plant Operators
8341.0101 Tractor Operator, Farm 8331.10
8341.0200 Operator, Farm Machines 8331.20
8341.0201 Harvesting Machine Operator
8341.0300 Tractor Driver, Construction 8331.30
8341.9900 Farm Machinery Operators, Other 8331.90
Family 8342 Earth Moving and Related Plant Operators
8342.0101 Bulldozer Operator 8332.10
8342.0200 Scrapper Operator 8332.12
8342.0301 Scrapper Loader Operator/Loader Operator 8332.14
8342.0400 Grader Operator 8332.16
8342.0501 Power Shovel Operator/Excavator Operator 8332.18
VOLUME I 226
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8342.0600 Bucket Wheel Excavator Operator 8332.20
8342.0700 Trench Digging Machine Operator 8332.22
8342.0800 Dragline Operator 8332.24
8342.0900 Dredger Operator 8332.26
8342.1000 Boom Driver 8332.28
8342.1100 Pile Driver 8332.30
8342.1201 Dumper Operator/Dumper/Tipper Operator 8332.32
8342.1202 Dumper Operator
8342.1300 Scoop Truck Operator 8332.34
8342.1400 Tripler Machine Operator 8332.36
8342.1500 Conveyor Operator 8332.45
8342.1600 Spreader Operator 8332.50
8342.1700 Road Roller Driver 8332.55
8342.1800 Bitumen Mixing Machine Operator 8332.60
8342.1900 Sand Blast Operator, Construction 8332.65
8342.2001 Excavator Operator
8342.2101 Mobile Equipment Operator
8342.2201 Stoking Car Operator Ferro Alloys
8342.9900 Earth Moving and Related Plant Operators, 8332.90
Other
Family 8343 Crane, Hoist and Related Plant Operators
8343.0100 Driver, Steam Crane 8333.10
VOLUME I 227
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8343.0200 Crane Operator, Diesel Electric 8333.12
8343.0300 Crane Operator, Pneumatic 8333.14
8343.0400 Crane Operator, Hydraulic 8333.16
8343.0500 Mobile Crane Operator 8333.18
8343.0501 EOT Crane Operator
8343.0600 Crane Operator, Gantry 8333.20
8343.0700 Overhead Crane Operator 8333.22
8343.0800 Derrick Crane Operator 8333.24
8343.0900 Derrick Crane Operator, Magnetic 8333.28
8343.1000 Crane Driver, Hammer Head 8333.30
8343.1100 Winchman 8333.32
8343.1200 Hoist Operator 8333.35
8343.1300 Bridge Opening Operator 8333.38
8343.1400 Winding Engineman 8333.40
8343.1500 Haulage Engine Driver 8333.50
8343.1600 Crane and Hoist Operators, Other 8333.60
8343.1700 Aerial Ropeway Operator 8333.65
8343.1800 Liftman 8333.70
8343.9900 Crane, Hoist and Related Plant Operators, 8333.90
Other
Family 8344 Lifting Truck Operators
8344.0100 Lift Truck Operator 8334.10
VOLUME I 228
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
8344.0201 Fork Lift Truck Operator/Fork Lift 8334.20
Operator/Driver
8344.9900 Lift Truck Operator, Other 8334.90
Group 835 Ships’ Deck Crews and Related Workers
Family 8350 Ships’ Deck Crews and Related Workers
8350.0100 Serang, Deck/Bosun 8340.10
8350.0300 Seaconny/OS (Ordinary Seaman) 8340.20
8350.0400 Lascar/OS (Ordinary Seaman) 8340.25
8350.0500 Driver, Launch/Tug Master 8340.30
8350.0600 Boatman 8340.40
8350.0700 Rudderman 8340.50
8350.0800 Oarsman 8340.60
8350.9900 Ships’ Deck Ratings, Barge Crews and 8340.90
Boatmen, Other
VOLUME I 229
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Division 9 Elementary Occupations
Sub- 91 Cleaners and Helpers
Division
Group 911 Domestic, Hotel and Office Cleaners and
Helpers
Family 9111 Domestic Cleaners and Helpers
9111.0100 Domestic Servant 9131.10
9111.0200 Char Dust Cleaner and Salvager 9131.20
9111.0300 Cleaner, Home Restoration Service 9131.30
9111.9900 Domestic and Related Helpers, Cleaners and 9131.90
Launderers, Other
Family 9112 Cleaners and Helpers in Offices, Hotels and
Other Establishments
9112.0100 Dusting Man, Office; Farash, 9132.10
Office/Housekeeping Attendant
9112.0200 Cleaner Hospital 9132.30
9112.9900 Helpers and Cleaners in Offices, Hotels and 9132.90
Other Establishments, Other
Group 912 Vehicle, Window, Laundry and Other Hand
Cleaners
Family 9121 Hand Launderers and Pressers
9121.0100 Dhobi 9133.10
9121.0200 Laundry Workers (Marker, Sorter) 9133.20
9121.0300 Dry Cleaner, Hand 9133.30
9121.0400 Spot Remover 9133.40
VOLUME I 230
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
9121.0500 Rug Cleaner 9133.50
9121.0600 Presser, Hand 9133.60
9121.0700 Dry Cleaner, Spot 9133.70
9121.9900 Launderers, Dry Cleaners and Pressers, 9133.90
Other
Family 9122 Vehicle Cleaners
9122.0100 Cleaner, Window 9142.10
9122.0201 Washer
9122.0301 Driving Assistant
9122.9900 Vehicle, Window and Related Cleaners, 9142.90
Other
Family 9123 Window Cleaners
Family 9129 Other Cleaning Workers
Sub- 92 Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery
Division Labourers
Group 921 Agricultural, Forestry and Fishery
Labourers
Family 9211 Crop Farm Labourers
9211.0100 Ploughman 9201.10
9211.0200 Labourer, Agriculture 9201.20
9211.0300 Picker (Tobacco) 9201.30
9211.9900 Farm Hands and Labourers, Other 9201.90
Family 9212 Livestock Farm Labourers
Family 9213 Mixed Crop and Livestock Farm Labourers
VOLUME I 231
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 9214 Garden and Horticultural Labourers
Family 9215 Forestry Labourers
9215.0100 Labourer, Plantation 9202.10
9215.0200 Tappers 9203.90
9215.9900 Forestry Labourers and Related Workers, 9202.90
Other
Family 9216 Fishery and Aquaculture Labourers
Sub- 93 Labourers in Mining, Construction,
Division Manufacturing and Transport
Group 931 Mining and Construction Labourers
Family 9311 Mining and Quarrying Labourers
9311.0100 Mines, Quarrymen, Related Workers 9311.10
9311.0101 Mazdoor/Helper
9311.0200 Digger (Mine & Quarry) 9311.20
9311.9900 Mining and Quarrying Labourers, Other 9311.90
Family 9312 Civil Engineering Labourers
9312.0100 Labourer, Other 9312.10
9312.0200 Track Repairer (Rail Transport) 9312.20
9312.9900 Construction and Maintenance Labourers, 9312.90
Other
Family 9313 Building Construction Labourers
9313.0100 Well Digger Helper 9313.10
9313.0201 Helper Bar Bender and Fixer
VOLUME I 232
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
9313.0301 Helper Mason
9313.0401 Helper Carpenter – Shuttering & Scaffolding
9313.0501 Helper Electrician
9313.0601 Helper Laboratory and Field Technician
9313.0701 Helper Painter and Decorator
9313.9900 Building Construction Labourers, Other 9313.90
Group 932 Manufacturing Labourers
Family 9321 Hand Packers
9321.0101 Packer, Hand 9322.10
9321.0102 Packager and Despatcher
9321.0201 Labeller 9322.20
9321.0205 Tagger and Labeller
9321.0300 Stenciler 9322.30
9321.0400 Stamper, Hand 9322.40
9321.1101 Weigher 9322.76
9321.1102 Issuing and Return In-Charge
9321.1103 Diamond Bagger and Flueter
9321.1200 Counter 9322.80
9321.1300 Container Washer, Machine 9322.85
9321.1401 Machining Assistant or Helper
9321.9900 Hand Packers, Others 9322.90
Family 9329 Manufacturing Labourers Not Elsewhere
VOLUME I 233
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Classified
9329.0100 Khatedar, Salt Production 9322.50
9329.0200 Mukadam, Salt Production 9322.55
9329.0300 Salt Reclamation Worker 9322.60
9329.0400 Checker 9322.70
9329.0500 Tester 9322.72
9329.0600 Sorter 9322.74
9329.0701 Accessory Fitter
9329.0801 Parts Picker
Group 933 Transport and Storage Labourers
Family 9331 Hand and Pedal Vehicle Drivers
9331.0100 Driver, Cycle Rickshaw 9331.10
9331.0300 Hand Cart Man 9331.30
9331.0400 Traffic Hand, Gliding 9331.40
9331.0600 Transport Equipment Operators and 9331.60
Drivers, Other
9331.0700 Transport Service Operator 9331.70
9331.9900 Hand Pedal Vehicle Drivers, Other 9331.90
Family 9332 Drivers of Animal-Drawn Vehicles and
Machinery
9332.0100 Horse Carriage Driver 9332.10
9332.0200 Cart Driver 9332.20
9332.0300 Mahout 9332.30
VOLUME I 234
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
9332.0400 Pack Animal Driver 9332.40
9332.0500 Supervisor, Animal-Drawn and Manually 9332.50
Operated Transport Equipment
9332.9900 Animal and Animal Drawn Vehicle Drivers, 9332.90
Other
Family 9333 Freight Handlers
9333.0100 Loader and Unloader 9333.10
9333.0101 Loader/Loading and Unloading Operator
9333.0201 Warehouse Worker
9333.0202 Loader, Transport
Associate/Loader/Unloader
9333.9900 Freight Handlers, Other 9333.90
Family 9334 Shelf Fillers
Sub- 94 Food Preparation Assistants
Division
Group 941 Food Preparation Assistants
Family 9411 Fast Food Preparers
Family 9412 Kitchen Helpers
9412.0100 Kitchen Helper 9132.20
Sub- 95 Street and Related Sales and Services
Division Workers
Group 951 Street and Related Service Workers
Family 9510 Street and Related Service Workers
9510.0100 Boot Polisher 9120.10
VOLUME I 235
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
9510.0200 Bill Poster 9120.20
9510.9900 Shoe Cleaning and Other Street Services 9120.90
Elementary Occupations, Other
Group 952 Street Vendors (Excluding Food)
Family 9520 Street Vendors (Excluding Food)
9520.0100 Hawker 9112.10
9520.9900 Street Vendors, Non-Food Products, Other 9112.90
Sub- 96 Refuse Workers and Other Elementary
Division Workers
Group 961 Refuse Workers
Family 9611 Garbage and Recycling Collectors
9611.0100 Garbage Collector (Motor Transport) 9161.10
9611.0201 E-Waste Collector
9611.9900 Garbage Collectors, Other 9161.90
Family 9612 Refuse Sorters
Family 9613 Sweepers and Related Labourers
9613.0300 Sweeper, Dry 9162.10
9613.0400 Sweeper, Wet 9162.20
9613.0500 Sweeper, Sewer 9162.30
9613.9900 Sweepers and Related Labourers, Other 9162.90
Group 962 Other Elementary Workers
Family 9621 Messengers, Package Deliverers and
Luggage Porters
VOLUME I 236
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
9621.0300 Caddie 9151.30
9621.0400 Bellhop (Hotel & Restaurant) 9151.40
9621.0500 Porter, Baggage (Hotel & Restaurant) 9151.50
9621.0600 (Letter Box Peon) Post Man 9151.60
9621.0700 Mail Carrier 9151.65
9621.0800 Runner, Mail 9151.70
9621.0900 Sorter, Mail 9151.75
9621.1200 Hotel Concierge 9152.10
9621.1300 Water Carrier 9162.40
9621.9900 Messengers, Package Deliverers and 9151.90
Luggage Porters, Other
Family 9622 Odd Job Persons
Family 9623 Meter Readers and Vending Machine
Collectors
9623.0100 Vending Machine Attendant 9153.10
9623.0200 Coin Collector 9153.15
9623.0300 Meter Reader 9153.20
9623.0301 Municipal Water and Sewage Assessor
9623.0401 PUC Attendant
9623.0501 Tyre Inflation Attendant
9623.0601 Quick Care Point Attendant
9623.9900 Vending Machine Money Collectors, Meter 9153.90
Readers and Related Workers, Other
VOLUME I 237
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Concordance Table
NCO 2015 NCO 2004
Family 9624 Water and Firewood Collectors
Family 9629 Elementary Workers Not Elsewhere
Classified
9629.0100 Usher 9152.40
9629.9900 Doorkeepers, Watchpersons and Related 9152.90
Workers, Other
VOLUME I 238
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
ALPHABETICAL INDEX
OF
NCO 2015
With Occupational Titles and Equivalent NCO 2004 Codes
VOLUME I 239
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Executive (Payroll)
Abrasive Coated 8122.7200 8223.72
Cloth and
Accounts 4311.0401
Papermaker
Executive
(Accounts Payable
Abrasive Mixer 8181.2200 8139.15
& Receivable)
Abrasive Wheel 7314.9900 7321.90
Accounts 4313.0201
Formers, Potters
Executive
and Related
(Statutory
Workers, Other
Compliance)
Abrasive Wheel 7314.0800 7321.50
Acid Concentrator 8131.8000 8159.80
Moulder
Acid Plant 8131.7700 8159.76
AC Specialist 7231.0102
Operator
Access Controls 7411.0101
Acid Worker, 8131.8100 8159.82
Installation
Other
Technician
Acoustical 7124.0200 7134.20
Accessory Fitter 9329.0701
Insulator
Accident Officer, 1324.2000 1226.69
Acrobat 2659.0200 3474.15
Tram
Actor and Actress 2655.0100 2455.50
Account Director ( 1120.3401
Advertising
Actuary 2120.0200 2121.20
Agency)
Addressing 4132.1000 4113.80
Account Executive 2431.0202
Machine Operator
(Advertising
Agency)
Accountant 2411.0100 2411.10
Adjuster, Relays 7412.0300 7241.30
Accounting and 4311.9900 4121.90
Bookkeeping
Clerks, Others
Accounts 4313.0101 4121.20
Clerk/Accounts
VOLUME I 240
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Department
Administrative & 1112.0700 1123.20
Managers, Others
Executive Officials,
Quasi Government
Advertising 1222.0102
(State)
Operations Co-
Ordinator (Digital)
Administrative and 1112.0800 1124.10
Executive Officials, Advertising Sales 5211.0100 5230.10
Local Bodies Agent/Advertising
Executive
Administrative and 1112.0600 1123.10
Executive Officials, Advocate 2611.0900 2421.80
Quasi Government
(Central) Advocate General 2611.0300 2421.30
Administrative 1112.0400 1122.10 Aerial – 2165.0300 2148.25
Official, State Photograph
Government Interpreter
Administrative 1112.0100 1121.10 Aerial Ropeway 8343.1700 8333.65
Official, Union Operator
Government
Aerodrome Officer 1324.0900 1226.35
Administrator, 2263.0200 2229.15
Hospital Aeronautical 3115.1000 3115.30
Engineering
Advance Pattern 7532.0902 Technician
Maker, Garment
(CAD/CAM) Agarbatti Maker 8131.8800 8229.20
Advertisement 2431.0400 2451.50 Agitator, Paper 8171.1100 8142.60
Writer Pulp
Advertising and 2431.9900 Agricultural and 1311.9900 1221.90
Marketing Forestry
Professionals, Production
Other Managers, Others
Advertising and 1222.9900 1234.90
Public Relations
VOLUME I 241
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Agricultural 2141.0900 2149.18 Air Traffic 3154.0100 3144.10
Engineer Controller
Specialist
Air Traffic 3154.9900 3144.90
Agricultural 3142.9900 `
Controllers, Other
Technicians,
Others
Aircraft Cargo 5111.0500 5111.50
Handling
Agriculture 7233.2800 7233.80
Supervisor
Engineering
Technician
Aircraft 7232.9900 7232.90
Mechanics, Other
Agriculture 6116.0101
Extension
Aircraft Pilot, 3153.0400 3143.40
Executive
Specialized
Agriculture 6116.0102
Aircraft Pilots and 3153.9900 3143.90
Extension Service
Related Associate
Provider
Professionals,
Other
Agriculture Field 2412.0501
Officer
Airframe Erector 7232.0100 7232.10
Agronomist 2132.0100 2213.10
Airport Engineer 2142.0800 2142.65
Agronomists and 2132.9900 2213.90
Algologist 2131.0800 2211.55
Related
Professionals, Allergy Specialist 2212.0300 2221.42
Other
Ammonia 3132.0800 8169.20
Air Compressor 3132.0700 8169.10 Compressor
Operator Attendant
Air Conditioning 3132.0900 8169.30 Ammonia 8131.2100 8152.70
and Refrigeration Operator/Ammoni
Plant Attendant a Plant Operator
Air Crew Member 5111.0600 5111.60 Ampoule 8131.7200 8159.66
Machine/Plant
Air Hostess 5111.0300 5111.30
VOLUME I 242
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Operator
Anthropologist, 2632.0700 2442.60
General
Anaesthesia 3212.0301
Technician
Anthropologist, 2632.0800 2442.70
Physical
Anaesthetist 2211.0400 2221.25
Apiarists and 6123.9900 6123.90
Analyst 2511.0105
Sericulturists,
Other
Analyst – Research 2421.0101
Application 2512.0701
Anatomist, 2211.0300 2221.20
Maintenance
Medical
Engineer
Animal and Animal 9332.9900 9332.90 Appraiser, 3315.0300 3417.60
Drawn Vehicle Customs
Drivers, Other
Archaeologist 2632.1100 2442.80
Animal Genetist 2250.0400 2226.30
Architect 2161.0100 2141.10
Animal Keeper 3240.0300 3227.30
Architect, Naval 2144.1100 2145.55
Animal Nutritionist 2265.0300 3223.30
Archivist 2621.0100 2431.10
Animal Pathologist 2250.0100 2212.60
Archivists and 2621.9900 2431.90
Animal Producers 6129.9900 6129.90 Curators, Other
and Related
Workers, Other Area Manager 3322.0801
(Auto
Animation 2166.0205 Components)
Director
Area Parts 5222.0101
Annealer (Glass 8181.1400 8131.65 Manager (APM)
Product)
Area Sales Officer 2433.0101
Annealer, Metal 8121.4700 8123.10
Area Service 1213.0201
Anthropologist, 2632.0900 2442.75 Manager
Cultural
Armature Winder 7412.0400 7241.40
VOLUME I 243
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Armed Security 5414.0151 Assembler, 8211.1100 8281.60
Guard Continuity
Assembler, 8212.0400 8282.40
Armourer 7222.0900 7222.85 Electrical
Accessories
Art Director 2166.0111
Assembler, Frame, 8211.1400 8281.75
Art Teacher 2355.0100 2339.10
Aircraft
Artificial Breeding 6130.0100 6130.10
Assembler, Hand 7536.2200 7442.79
Technician
Assembler, 8131.9000 8229.40
Arts Teacher, 2355.9900 2339.90
Marking Devices
Other
(Pen & Pencil)
Assembler (Clock 7311.0300 7311.25
Assembler, Metal 8219.0400 8284.40
& Watch)
Furniture
Assembler (Plastic 8219.0300 8284.30
Assembler, Motor 8211.1300 8281.70
Product)
Cycle
Assembler Dry Cell 8212.0200 8282.20
Assembler, 8211.0400 8281.25
(Battery
Refrigerator and
Manufacturing)
Air-Conditioning
Unit
Assembler Loco 8211.0900 8281.50
Engines
Assembler, Sewing 8219.0200 8284.20
Machine
Assembler 8212.0700 8283.10
Precision
Assembler, 8211.0600 8281.35
Instrument
Stationary Diesel
Engine
Assembler Printing 8211.0200 8281.15
Machinery
Assembler, 8211.0500 8281.30
Stationary Petrol
Assembler, 8211.1200 8281.65
Engine
Automobile
Assembler, Textile 8211.0300 8281.20
Assembler, Bicycle 8219.0100 8284.10
Machinery
VOLUME I 244
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Assembler, Tractor 8211.0700 8281.40 Assembly 8212.1801
Operator
Assembler, 8211.0800 8281.45 Capacitor
Turbine and Steam
Engine
Assembler, 8211.0100 8281.10
Workshop
Assembly 3139.2001
Machine and
Supervisor
Equipment
Assembly Line 7223.0401 Assignment 5414.0102
Machine Setter Manager
Assembly Line 7422.1901 Assistant Bar 7214.1101
Operator Bender and Fixer
Assembly Line 3122.0601 Assistant 5142.0101
Supervisor Beautician
Assembly 8212.2201 Assistant Casting 8121.3801
Operator – PMD Technician
and X-Ray
Assistant Hair 5141.0201
Assembly 8212.1401 Stylist
Operator – TV
Assistant 3112.0701
Assembly 8212.0900 8283.30 Laboratory and
Operator (Radio Field Technician
Manufacturing)
Assistant Mason 7112.0601
Assembly 8212.0800 8283.20
Operator Assistant Painter 7131.0101
(Telephone and Decorator
Equipment
Assistant 3255.0101
Manufacturing)
Physiotherapist
Assistant 7119.0301
Scaffolder
VOLUME I 245
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
(Non-Voice)
Assistant 7115.0201
Shuttering
Associate— 3512.0202
Carpenter
Desktop
Publishing (DTP)
Associate – 2120.0501
Analytics
Associate Network 5242.0501 5220.20
Associate – Clinical 3512.0601
Engineer
Data Management
Associate 5242.0502
Associate – CRM 5244.0102
Operations
Associate – 2641.0701 Engineer
Editorial
Astrologer 5161.0100 5151.10
Associate – 2411.0201
Astrologers, 5161.9900 5152.90
Finance &
Fortune Tellers
Accounting
and Related
Complex
Workers, Other
Associate – 2641.0801
Astronomer 2111.0900 2111.60
Learning
Athletic Coach 3422.0100 3475.40
Associate – 3512.0702
Medical
Attorney at Law 2611.0800 2421.70
Transcription
Attorney General 2611.0100 2421.10
Associate – 2423.0101
of India
Recruitment
Auctioneer 3339.0300 3417.10
Associate – Supply 3323.0601
Chain
Audit, Clerk 4311.0500 4121.50
Management
Auditor 2411.0200 2411.20
Associate – 2411.0101
Transactional
Author 2641.0100 2451.10
Finance &
Accounting Authors, 2641.9900 2451.90
Journalists and
Associate 5244.0202
Other Writers
Customer Care
VOLUME I 246
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Operator
Auto Blocker 7313.1302
Autocomponent 3139.1501
Auto Body 7132.0203
Assembly Fitter
Painting
Technician –
Automated Optical 3113.0803
Surface Treatment
Inspection
Machine Operator
Auto Body 7213.0302
Technician/Denter
Automated Optical 7412.0103
Inspection
Auto Bruter 7313.1306
Operator
Auto Engine 7213.0201
Automation 7412.0101
Repair Technician
Specialist
Auto Service 3115.0602
Automobile 2144.0800 2145.42
Technical
Designer
Manager/Auto
Service Technician
Automotive Body 7132.0204
Painting
Auto Service 7231.0108
Technician
Technician –
Helper
Automotive Body 7231.0103
Technician Level 3
Auto Service 7231.0107
Technician –
Automotive Body 7231.0104
Mechanic
Technician Level 4
Auto Service 7231.0501
Automotive 3115.0201 3115.20
Technician (Two
Engineering
and Three
Technician/Testing
Wheelers)
Manager
Auto Spray Painter 7132.0205
Automotive Paint 7132.0901
Assistant/Painter
Shop Assistant
Auto Spray 7132.0202
Auto-Tester 7421.1201
Painter/Painter
Capacitor
Autoclave 8131.3501 8154.30
Ayah, Domestic 5311.0400 5131.20
VOLUME I 247
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Ayah, Institutional 5311.0100 5131.10 Banana Farmer 6111.0901
Back Sizer 8152.2100 8262.86 Band Builder (Tyre 8141.1900 8231.83
Building)
Bacteriologist 2131.1200 2211.85
Band Saw 8172.0300 8141.25
Bagpipe Maker 7312.1600 7312.58 Operator
Bailiff 4419.0400 4190.55 Bandroll and 8131.4600 8222.70
Labelling Machine
Baker (Baking 7512.0100 7412.10
Operator
Products)
Bank Clerk 4311.0200 4121.30
Bakers, Pastry 7512.9900 7412.90
Cooks and Bank Tellers and 4211.9900 4212.90
Confectionery Related Clerks,
Makers, Other Other
Bale Breaker 7318.0900 7431.10 Banksman 8111.2400 7111.76
Tenter,
Cotton/Blow Barber 5141.0300 5141.20
Room Operator
Bare Board Testing 7412.0104
Bale Cutter 8131.5900 8159.34 Operator
Operator, Rubber
Bare Foot 3142.0201
Ball Filling 7223.2500 8211.62 Technician (BFT)
Machine Operator
Bark Pitman 7535.1100 7441.34
Ball Lapping 7223.2600 8211.64 (Tanning)
Machine Operator
Barman 5132.0100 5123.60
Ball Mill Operator 8181.2400 8139.30
(Cement & Barman, Lino 7321.1700 7343.60
Ceramics) Machine
Balling – Machine 8159.0300 8269.30 Barrel-Lathe 8172.0900 8141.62
Operator (Textile) Operator, Outside
(Wood Container)
Bamboo Grower 6112.0701
Bartenders, Other 5132.9900
VOLUME I 248
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Basket Maker 7317.0700 7424.30 Beam Gaiter 7318.5000 7432.42
Bearer, 5131.0300 5123.30
Basketry Weavers, 7317.9900 7424.90
Domestic/Househ
Brush Makers and
old Workers
Related Workers,
Other
Bearing 7233.0301
Maintenance
Batch Mixer 8181.2100 8139.10
(Glass)
Beaterman, Paper 3139.0200 8142.55
Pulp
Batch Still 3133.0400 8154.10
Operator,
Beautician 5142.0100 5141.30
Chemical
Beauticians and 5142.9900 5141.90
Batching and 8114.0200 8212.20
Related Workers,
Mixing Plant
Others
Operator
(Construction)
Beekeeper 6123.0101 6123.10
Batching Worker, 7318.1000 7431.12
Bellhop (Hotel & 9621.0400 9151.40
Wool
Restaurant)
Bath Attendant 5142.0700 5141.80
Bellow Man 7312.0500 7312.22
(Harmonium)
Bathroom and 3432.0501
Kitchen Designer
Belt Conveyor 7233.0401
Maintenance
Battery Assembler 8212.0100 8282.10
Belt Maker 7536.2600 7442.83
Battery Repairer 8212.0300 8282.30
Belt Press 8122.7400 8223.74
Battery Servicing 7419.0500 7249.50
Operator
Man
(Abrasive)
Bead Maker 7315.1000 7322.28
Bender (Glass) 7315.0700 7322.22
(Glass)
Bending Machine 7223.2000 8211.46
Bead Maker 8141.0600 8231.35
Operator
(Rubber Tyre)
Bidi Checker 7516.0900 7416.50
VOLUME I 249
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Bidi Maker 7516.0700 7416.40 Blade Sawing 3122.6504
Supervisor
Bill and Accounts 4311.0700 4121.70
Collector
Blade Sawyer 8189.0405
Bill Collector 4214.0100 4215.10
Bill Poster 9510.0200 9120.20 Bleacher, Paper 8171.0900 8142.50
Pulp
Bill Processing 4132.1400 4114.40
Clerk Bleaching 3133.0600 8159.30
Operator,
Biographer 2633.0200 2443.20
Chemical
Biologist, General 2131.0100 2211.10
Bleaching, Dyeing 8154.9900 8264.90
and Cleaning
Biologists, 2131.9900 2211.90
Machine
Botanists,
Operators, Other
Zoologists and
Related
Blender 3134.0500 8155.50
Professionals,
(Petroleum
Other
Refining)
Bio-Medical 2143.0200 2149.17
Blender, Tobacco 7516.0300 7416.20
Engineer
Blocking 3122.6507
Bio-Medical 3211.0200 3133.20
Supervisor
Equipment
Technician Blood Bank 3212.0602
Technician
Bitumen Mixing 8342.1800 8332.60
Machine Operator Blood Donor Unit 3412.0100 3460.10
Assistant
Blacksmith 7221.0100 7221.10
Blower Helper 7315.0300 7322.14;
Blacksmiths, 7221.9900 7221.90
(Glass) 7322.16;
Hammersmith and
7322.18
Forging Press
Workers, Other Blower Operator 3132.1200 8169.60
VOLUME I 250
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
(Chemical)
Blower, Glass 7315.0100 7322.10
Book Binder 7323.0100 7345.10
Blower, 7315.0200 7322.12
Laboratory
Book Binders and 7323.9900 7345.90
Apparatus
Related Workers,
Other
Blowing Machine 8181.0100 8131.10
Operator (Glass)
Book Binding 7323.0400 7345.40
Worker
Blue Printer 3118.0900 3118.85
Book Mender 7323.0300 7345.30
Boatman 8350.0600 8340.40
Booking Clerk, 4212.0100 4211.60
Body Builder, 7522.0600 7422.25
Recreation
Automobile
Booking Clerk, 4221.0400 4211.50
Body Builder, 7522.0800 7422.30
Transport/Concier
Other Vehicles
ge
Body Shop In- 3115.0104
Bookkeeper 4311.0101 4121.10
Charge
General/Accounts
Executive
Boiler Fitter 7214.0300 7214.30
(Recording and
Boiler House 8182.0400 8162.40 Reporting)
Operatives
Bookkeeping 4132.1300 4114.30
Boiler Maker 7214.0500 7214.50 Machine Operator
Boiler Supervisor 3122.1600 8168.10 Bookmaker 4212.0200 4213.10
Boiler, Attendant 8182.0200 8162.20 Bookmakers, 4212.9900 4213.90
Croupiers and
Boiler, Fireman 8182.0300 8162.30 Related Gaming
Workers, Other
Boiler, Tindal 8182.0100 8162.10
Boom Driver 8342.1000 8332.28
Boiling In-Charge 7313.2501
Boot Polisher 9510.0100 9120.10
Boiling Tub 3133.0300 8152.65
Operator Borer/Operator 7223.1701 8211.40
VOLUME I 251
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Boring Machine
Braid Maker, 8152.1300 8262.65
Operator
Machine/Braiding
Machine Operator
Botanist, General 2131.0400 2211.35
Braille – 7322.1000 7341.80
Bottle Blowing 8142.0700 8232.35
Duplicating
Machine Operator
Machine Operator
(Plastic)
(Printing &
Publishing)
Bottle Washer, 8160.8100 8278.55
Braille and Talking 4411.0200 4141.20
Machine
Books Clerk
Bottling Plant In- 8160.8000 8278.50
Braille Transcriber, 4414.0100 4144.10
Charge
Hand
Bottom Polisher 7313.1504
Braille Typist 4131.0400 4111.40
Box Assembly 8212.2202
Brake Specialist 7231.0105
Operator
Braker, Passenger 8312.0500 8312.50
Box Closing 8131.4500 8222.60
Train
Machine Operator
(Match)
Brakesman, 5112.0300 5112.30
Railway
Box Filling 8131.4300 8222.40
Machine Operator
Brand Manager 3339.0200 2419.50
(Match)
Brass Musical 7312.1700 7312.60
Box Filtration 8131.2600 8153.30
Instruments
Operator
Assembler
Box Making 8131.4200 8222.30
Bratticeman 8111.2100 7111.72
Machine Operator
(Match) Brazer 7212.0500 7212.50
Box-Building 8212.1607 Breaker Feeder, 7318.3800 7431.72
Assembly Jute
Technician
Breaker Tender 3131.0900 8161.70
Braid Maker, Hand 7318.6700 7432.76
VOLUME I 252
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Brew Master 8160.6800 8278.10 Brush Material 7317.1300 7424.60
Preparer
Bricklayer (Brick & 8181.1900 8131.79
Tile) Brushing 8154.2400 8264.84
Machineman
Bricklayer, 7112.0300 7122.30 (Textile)
Refractory
Bruting Supervisor 3122.6506
Bricklayerer, 7112.0200 7122.20
Construction BSS Support 3114.0601
Engineer
Bricklayerers, 7112.9900 7122.90
Other Bucket Wheel 8342.0600 8332.20
Excavator
Bricks and Tile 7314.0700 7321.40 Operator
Moulder, Hand
Budder 6112.0400 6112.65
Bridge Opening 8343.1300 8333.38
Operator Budget Analyst 2412.0300 2411.60
Briefing Assistant 3341.1100 3431.40 Buffoon; Clown 2659.0700 3474.42
Brine Maker 8131.3200 8153.80 Builders, 7111.9900 7121.90
(Chemical) Traditional
Materials, Other
Briner 7511.0400 7411.40
Building and 7411.9900 7137.90
Broadband 3114.0804 Related
Technician Electricians, Other
Broadcasting and 3521.9900 3132.90 Building 2161.9900 2141.90
Audiovisual Architects, Other
Technicians, Other
Building 5153.9900 9141.90
Broker, Share 3311.0100 3411.10 Caretakers, Other
Market
Building 9313.9900 9313.90
Broom Maker 7317.1000 7424.45 Construction
Labourers, Other
Brush Maker, 7317.1400 7424.65
Hand
VOLUME I 253
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Building Frame 7119.9900 7129.90 Butter Maker 7513.0300 7413.30
and Related
Trades Workers, Button Hole 7532.1200 7435.55
Other Maker
Building Insulator, 7124.0100 7134.10 Button Hole 8153.0200 8263.20
Hand Maker, Machine
Building Insulator, 8183.0100 8290.30 Button Maker 8142.1200 8232.62
Machine
Button Stitching 8153.0400 8263.40
Bulb Crop 6111.1401 Machine Operator
Cultivator
Buyer 3323.0100 3416.10
Bulldozer 8342.0101 8332.10
Buyers, Other 3323.9900 3416.90
Operator
Cabinet Maker 7522.0200 7422.15
Burner Cement 8181.3100 8139.80
Cabinet Makers 7522.9900 7422.90
Bus and Tram 8331.9900 8323.90
and Related
Drivers, Other
Workers, Other
Bus Conductor 5112.1000 5112.70
Cable Jointer 7422.0800 7245.20
Business 4419.0102
Cable Maker, Rack 8212.1100 8283.50
Correspondent
Wiring (Telephone
Business 2433.0601 & Telegraph
Development Equipment
Executive Manufacturing)
Butcher 7511.0100 7411.10 Cable Television 7422.1200 7243.45
Installer
Butchers, 7511.9900 7411.90
Fishmongers and Caddie 9621.0300 9151.30
Related Food
Calendar Machine 8141.0100 8231.10
Preparers, Other
Operator
Butler 5131.0100 5123.10
Calenderer 8141.1301 8231.70
Rubberised
VOLUME I 254
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Fabric/Operator-
Candle Maker 7318.0100 7332.10
Textile Coating
Candle Moulder 7318.0200 7332.20
Calenderman 8154.1800 8264.78
(Cotton Textile)
Candy Maker 7512.0500 7412.30
Calenderman, 8171.2400 8143.70
Cane Carrier 8160.4300 8276.72
Handmade Paper
Driver, Mill House
Calenderman, 3139.0500 8143.65
Cane Cutter 6210.0800 6141.45
Paper
Caner 7317.0600 7424.25
Calibration 7311.1002
Engineer Cannery Worker 7514.0900 7414.52
(Can &
Calibration 7311.1001
Preservation)
Technician
Canvasser, Sales 3322.0300 3415.40
Calibrator 7311.1000 7311.67
(Instrument & Cap Maker 7531.0900 7433.50
Apparatus)
Capping Machine 8212.1904
Calibrator, 8212.0600 8282.60 Operator
Electrical
Captain, 3152.0100 3142.10
Calibrator, Glass 7311.0900 7311.65 Ship/Master
Calibrator, Other 7311.1100 7311.70 Caption Writer 2431.0300 2451.47
Delivery 3339.0601 3429.10 Car, Taxi and Van 8322.9900 8322.90
Management Cell Drivers, Other
Agent
Carbonation Man 8160.4900 8276.78
CAM Machine 8189.0301
Operator Carbonation 8160.5000 8276.79
Storage Tank
Cameraman, 3521.0300 3131.20 Attendant
Animation
Carbonator 8160.8200 8278.60
Cameraman, 7321.1200 7343.30 Machine
Photomechanical Attendant
VOLUME I 255
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Structural
Carbonizer, Textile 8154.0700 8264.64
Carpenter, Village 7115.0400 7124.30
Card Cutter 8152.0400 8262.20
Carpenters and 7115.9900 7124.90
Cardboard Box 8143.0100 8253.10
Joiners
Maker
Operatives, Other
Cardiac Care 3211.0801
Carpet Clipper, 7318.6000 7432.60
Technician
Hand
Cardiologist 2212.0500 2221.50
Carpet Embosser 7318.6100 7432.61
Cardtenter, 7318.2700 7431.50
Carpet Repairer 7318.6200 7432.62
Cotton/Carding
Tenter
Carpet Weaver 7318.0300 7332.30
(Carpet & Rug)
Caretaker, 5153.0100 9141.10
Building
Carpet Weaver, 7318.5900 7432.59
Hand Knitting
Caretaker, Burial 5153.0300 9141.30
Places and
Carrier Attendant 7422.0700 7244.70
Cremation
(Telephone) and
Grounds
Telegraph
Caretaker, 5153.0200 9141.20
Cart Driver 9332.0200 9332.20
Monument
Cartographer 2165.0100 2148.10
Carpenter Worker, 7115.1100 7124.65
Boat Building
Cartographers and 2165.9900 2148.90
Surveyors, Other
Carpenter, Boat 7115.1200 7124.70
Building
Cartoonist 2651.0600 2452.55
Carpenter, 7115.0200 7124.20
Case Finisher 7532.0300 7435.18
Construction
(Leather Product)
Carpenter, 7115.0100 7124.10
Cashier, Bank 4211.0200 4211.20
General
Cashier, Cash 4211.0301 4211.30
Carpenter, 7115.0300 7124.25
Counter
VOLUME I 256
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Cashier, Gem & 4211.0302 CCTV Installation 7411.0102
Jewellery Technician
Cashier, General 4211.0100 4211.10 CCTV Supervisor 5414.0121
Cast Stone Maker 8114.0500 8212.50 Cell Room 8131.8200 8159.84
Attendant,
Caster, Pottery 7314.0200 7321.15 Chemical
and Porcelain
Cellophane Bag 8143.0300 8253.30
Casting – Operator 8121.4400 8122.77 Maker, Machine
Helper (Non-
Ferrous Metal) Cement and Other 8114.9900 8212.90
Mineral Products
Casting Line In- 3122.4401 Machine
Charge Operators, Other
Casting Line 3122.4402 Cement Finisher 7114.0200 7123.20
Supervisor
Cementer 8113.0400 8113.25
Casting Machine 8189.0501
Operator Cementer (Plastic) 8142.1500 8232.75
Casting Machine 8121.4300 8122.76 Centrifugal Casting 3135.3100 8122.72
Operator (Non- Machine Operator
Ferrous Metal)
Centrifugal Man 8160.4000 8276.65
Casting or Foundry 8121.3301
Assistant/Helper Ceramic 2141.2300 2149.72
Technologist
Casting Technician 7211.0201
– Sand Moulding Certified Training 2320.0101
Assessor
Caulker, Boat 7115.1300 7124.75
Building Chairman, 2612.0800 2422.70
Administrative
Causticman, Paper 8171.0800 8142.45 Tribunal
Pulp/Causticizing
Operator Char Dust Cleaner 9111.0200 9131.20
and Salvager
VOLUME I 257
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Character 2166.0206 Cheese Maker 7513.0400 7413.40
Designer
Chemical 2145.0400 2146.35
Charcoal Burner, 8131.5600 8159.25 Engineer, Drugs
Beehive Kiln and Acids
(Chemical)
Chemical 2145.0600 2146.45
Charcoal Burner, 6210.1700 6142.10 Engineer,
Wood Fertilizers
Charge Hand, Rack 3122.5900 7248.40 Chemical 2145.0700 2146.50
Wiring (Telephone Engineer, Food
Equipment)
Manufacturing Chemical 2145.0100 2146.10
Engineer, General
Charger, 8121.3000 8122.50
Reveraberatory, Chemical 2145.0300 2146.30
Pulverised Coal Engineer, Paints
Fired/Reverberato and Varnish
ry Furnace
Chemical 2145.0500 2146.40
Operator
Engineer,
Chauffer, Cab 8322.0102 Petroleum
Driver
Chemical 3116.9900 3116.90
Chauffer, Driver 8322.0101 Engineering
Personal Technicians,
Other/Chemical
Check Flight 3153.1000 3143.82 Process
Engineer Technicians
Check Navigator, 3153.0700 3143.65 Chemical 2145.9900 2146.90
Aircraft Engineers and
Technologists,
Check Pilot 3153.0200 3143.20 Other
Checker 9329.0400 9322.70 Chemical Process 3133.0700 8159.50
Operator
Checker 7314.1200 7329.35
(Radioactive
(Ceramics)
Materials)
VOLUME I 258
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Chemical 3133.9900 Chemists, Other 2113.9900 2113.90
Processing Plant
Controllers, Other Chewing Tobacco 7516.1100 7416.60
Maker
Chemical Products 8131.9900 8229.90
Machine Chick Maker 7317.1100 7424.50
Operators, Other
Chief Engineer, 3151.0100 3141.10
Chemical 3111.0400 3111.35 Ship
Radiation
Chief Flight 3153.0900 3143.80
Technician
Engineer
Chemist, 2113.0500 2113.50
Chief Librarian 1120.3800 1219.40
Analytical
Chief Navigator, 3153.0600 3143.60
Chemist, Biological 2131.1300 2212.10
Aircraft
Chemist, Food 2131.1400 2212.20
Chief Officer, Ship 3152.0200 3142.20
Chemist, Forensic 2113.0800 2113.80
Chief Pilot, Aircraft 3153.0100 3143.10
Science
Chief Steward, 5111.0100 5111.10
Chemist, General 2113.0100 2113.10
Ship/Chief Cook
Chemist, Industrial 2113.0600 2113.60
Child and Family 2635.0500 2446.42
Chemist, Inorganic 2113.0300 2113.30 Social Worker
Chemist, Organic 2113.0200 2113.20 Child Care Worker 5311.0200 5131.30
Chemist, 2262.0100 2113.70 Child Care 5311.9900 5131.90
Pharmaceuticals Workers, Other
Chemist, 2262.0101 Child Welfare 2635.0800 2446.55
Pharmaceuticals Organizer
Chemist, Physical 2113.0400 2113.40 Chillies Cultivator 6111.1801
Chemist, Water 3116.0600 3116.60 Chipperman, 8171.0100 8142.10
Purification/Water Paper Pulp
Treatment
VOLUME I 259
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Grower
Chiropodist 2264.0300 3226.30
Civil Engineer, 2142.0200 2142.20
Chocolate Maker 7512.0800 7412.50
Building
Chocolate Maker, 8160.1800 8274.40
Civil Engineer, 2142.0100 2142.10
Helper
General
Choreographer 2653.0100 2454.10
Civil Engineer, 2142.0600 2142.50
Highways and
Choreographers 2653.9900 2454.90
Roads
and Dancers,
Other
Civil Engineer, 2142.0400 2142.40
Irrigation
Cigar or Cheroot 7516.0500 7416.30
Roller
Civil Engineer, 2142.0900 2142.70
Public Health
Cigar or Cheroot 7516.0600 7416.35
Roller Helper
Civil Engineer, 2142.0700 2142.60
Railways
Cigarette Making 8160.8800 8279.50
Machine Operator
Civil Engineer, 2142.0300 2142.30
Structural
Cinematograph 3521.0900 3132.40
Operator
Civil Engineering 3112.9900 3112.90
Technicians, Other
Cinematographer 3521.0100 3131.10
Civil Engineers, 2142.9900 2142.90
Circuit Imaging 7321.0801
Other
Operator
Claims Inspector, 3315.0200 3417.50
Circuit Imaging 7321.0802
Railways
Operator – Photo
Imaging
Clarinet Assembler 7312.1500 7312.55
Circular Saw 8172.0400 8141.30
Clay Maker 7314.1100 7329.25
Operator
(Pottery)
Circus Performers, 2659.0500 3474.35
Clay Modeller 8181.3200 8139.82
Other
Clay Toy 7314.0300 7321.20
Citrus Fruit 6111.1101
VOLUME I 260
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Maker/Hand
Clinical Sociologist 2632.0300 2442.25
Moulder
Cloth 7543.0101 3152.10
Cleaner Hospital 9112.0200 9132.30
Examiner/Fabric
Checker
Cleaner Motor 7231.0900 7231.60
Vehicle
Cluster In-Charge 3113.0901
Cleaner, Home 9111.0300 9131.30
Cluster Manager 1330.0701
Restoration
Service
Clutch Specialist 7231.0106
Cleaner, Window 9122.0100 9142.10
CNC Operator – 7223.5002
Machining
Cleaning and 5151.9900 5121.90
Technician
Housekeeping
Supervisors in
CNC Operator – 7223.5003
Offices, Hotels and
Machinist
Other
Establishments, CNC Operator – 7223.6002
Other Turning
Clean-Up Artist 2166.0207 CNC Operator - 7223.5004
Vertical Machining
Clerical Support 4419.9900 5132.90
Centre
Workers, Other
CNC Programmer 7223.6003
Clerk, Cost 4311.0600 4121.60
Accounting CNC Setter-cum- 7223.6001
Operator –
Clerk, Enquiry 4110.0200 4190.20
Turning
Clerk, General 110.0100 4190.10
CNC Setter-cum- 7223.5005
Operator –
Clicker Press 8122.7800 8223.78
Vertical Machining
Operator
Centre
(Abrasive)
Coach Builder, 7522.0700 7422.28
Clinical 2634.0600 2445.60
Railway
Psychologist
VOLUME I 261
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Coat Maker 7531.0300 7433.20 Coir Weaver 7318.6300 7432.63
(Matting)
Coating Machine 8171.2500 8143.80
Operator, Coke Oven 8131.4900 8159.12
Hardboard (Paper Operator,
Goods) Controller
Coating, Curing 8212.1804 Collections 5244.0203
and Marking Executive
Operator
Colour Key Artist 2166.0511
Cobber, Mica 7542.0300 7119.20
Colour Maker 7322.1400 7346.40
Coconut Grower 6111.0851 (Textile Product)
Coding Clerk 4413.0100 4143.10 Colourist 2166.0512
Coding Machine 4132.0600 4113.50 Columnist 2642.0200 2451.35
Operator
Comb 7318.3400 7431.66
Coding, 4413.9900 4143.90 Minder/Combing
Proofreading and Preparatory
Related Clerks, Operator
Others
Combing Tenter 8151.0500 8261.30
Coffee Blender 8160.6400 8277.45
Commentary 2642.0400 2451.45
Coffee Plantation 6112.0601 Writer
Worker
Commentator 2642.0600 2451.60
Coffee Roaster 8160.6500 8277.50 (Motion Picture)
Coil Packaging 3135.2003 Commercial Artist 2166.0100 2452.60
Machine Operator
Rolling Mills Commercial 5249.0202
Executive/Officer
Coil Winder, 7412.0500 7241.50
Machine Commercial 5249.0201
Manager
Coin Collector 9623.0200 9153.15 (Zonal/Regional)
VOLUME I 262
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Commercial Sales 3322.9900 3415.90 Composing Room 7321.0400 7341.30
Representatives, Operatives
Other
Compositor 2166.0208
Commercial 3322.0200 3415.30
Traveller, General Compositor, Hand 7321.0100 7341.15
Commercial 8331.0301 Compounding 8131.0500 8151.45
Vehicle Driver Man (Match)
Commercial 8331.0302 Compression 8142.0600 8232.30
Vehicle Driver – Moulding Machine
Assistant Operator (Plastic)
Commercial 5165.0101 Computer 3513.9900
Vehicle Driver Network and
Trainer Systems
Technician, Other
Commission Agent 2412.0600 3411.40
Computer 2523.9900 2139.90
Communication 1330.0101 Network
Analyst Professionals,
Other
Community Health 3253.9900
Workers, Other Computer 4131.0600 4112.20
Operator
Community 6116.0112
Service Provider Computer 2512.0100 2132.10
Programmer/Soft
Complaint 4225.0100 4221.30 ware Engineer
Attending
Clerk/Customer Computer 2514.9900 2132.90
Service Programmers,
Desk/Customer Other
Service Executive
Computer Security 3513.0200 3121.30
Component 8212.1606 Specialist
Preparation
Operator Computer System 2523.0200 2139.40
Hardware
Analyst/Hardware
VOLUME I 263
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Engineer
Construction and 9312.9900 9312.90
Maintenance
Computer 3112.0500 3112.50
Labourers, Other
Topographical
Construction 1323.9900 1303.90
Conche Operator 7512.0900 7412.60
Managers, Other
(Sugar &
Confectionery)
Container Washer, 9321.1300 9322.85
Machine
Concrete Mixer 7122.0200 7132.20
(Mosaic Tile)
Continuous Curing 8141.0711
Operator
Concrete Mixer 8114.0300 8212.30
Operator
Continuous 8131.4000 8222.10
Machine Operator
Concrete Moulder 7114.0100 7123.10
(Match Box
Manufacturing)
Concrete Placers, 7114.9900 7123.90
Concrete Finishers
Continuous Still 3133.0500 8154.20
and Related
Operator,
Workers, Other
Chemical
Condiment Maker 7514.0800 7414.50
Continuous Still 3134.0100 8155.10
(Food Canning &
Operator,
Preserving)
Petroleum
Conditioner, 7516.0400 7416.25
Contortionist 2659.0400 3474.30
Tobacco
Contract Officer, 1330.0200 1226.70
Conductor Guard, 5112.0400 5112.40
Telephone/Liaising
Railway
Officer/
PRO/Business
Conductor, 3339.0500 3417.30
Executive
Auction Sale
Control Man 3134.0400 8155.40
Conductor, Tram 5112.0900 5112.60
(Petroleum
Cone Operator 8112.1200 8112.70 Refining)
(Mine & Quarry)
Control Man, 3135.3900 8124.10
Constable, Excise 5412.0300 5162.30 Billet/Process
VOLUME I 264
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Controller
Cooks, Other 5120.9900 5122.90
Control Tower 3521.1600 3132.76
Cooling Man 7315.1900 7322.50
Operator,
(Glass)
Aerodrome
Cooper 7522.1100 7422.40
Controller, Tram 4323.0400 4133.30
Copy Holder 4110.0400 4190.35
Converter 8131.3800 8154.60
Operator (Grain
Copyright Clerk 4110.0300 4190.30
Feed Mills)
Coral Breaker 7541.0300 6152.50
Convertor 3135.0600 8121.35
Blower/Convertor Cord Dipping 8141.0200 8231.15
Blower Technician Operator
Convertor 3135.0700 8121.40 Core Analyst, 3116.0400 3116.40
Man/Convertor Petrol and Natural
Blower Technician Gas
Conveyor 7233.0402 Core Engineer 2153.0601
Operation and
Maintenance Core Layer, 8172.1200 8141.75
Plywood
Conveyor 8342.1500 8332.45
Operator Core Laying 8172.1100 8141.70
Machine Operator
Cook, Domestic 5120.0300 5122.30
Core Maker, 8121.4600 8122.80
Cook, General 7514.0700 7414.40 Machine
(Food Canning and
Preserving) Core Maker, 7211.0500 7211.50
Moulding (Hand)
Cook, Institutional 5120.0200 5122.20
Core Maker, 7211.0600 7211.60
Cook, Ship 5120.0400 5122.40 Vertical Pipe
Cooker (Silkworm) 7318.1900 7431.30 Coriander 6111.1901
Cultivator
Cooker Operator 8160.1600 8274.20
Coroner 2619.1000 2429.65
VOLUME I 265
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Operators, Other
Cost Accountant 2411.0300 2411.30
Creative Writer 2431.0700 2451.52
Cotton Cultivator 6111.0601
Credit and Loan 3312.9900
Counsellor 2423.0200 2412.50
Officers, Other
Counsellor, 2635.1100 2446.85
Creeperman, 8111.1600 7111.55
Marriage and
Colliery
Family
Crier, Auction 3339.0400 3417.20
Counter 9321.1200 9322.80
Criminologists 2632.0500 2442.40
Counter Moulder 7536.1200 7442.45
Critic 2641.0200 2451.15
Court Receiver 2619.0800 2429.55
and Liquidator
CRM Domestic 5244.0201
Non-Voice
Crabbing 8154.2500 8264.85
Machineman
CRM Domestic 5244.0101
(Woollen Textile)
Voice
Crane and Hoist 8343.1600 8333.60
Crochet Worker, 7318.6500 7432.72
Operators, Other
Hand
Crane Driver, 8343.1000 8333.30
Cropper 8154.2200 8264.82
Hammer Head
Crude Oil Treater 8131.2800 8153.50
Crane Operator, 8343.0200 8333.12
(Oil Field)
Diesel Electric
Crude Oil Treater 8131.3100 8153.70
Crane Operator, 8343.0600 8333.20
(Petrol & Gas)
Gantry
Crusher 7315.2200 7329.10
Crane Operator, 8343.0400 8333.16
Attendant, Stone
Hydraulic
Crusher Operator, 8131.0100 8151.10
Crane Operator, 8343.0300 8333.14
Chemical
Pneumatic
Crusher Operator, 8112.0100 8112.10
Crane, Hoist and 8343.9900 8333.90
Mineral
Related Plant
VOLUME I 266
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Crusher Operator, 8160.3400 8276.10 Customer Relation 5244.0103
Sugarcane Executive
Crystalizerman 8160.3900 8276.60 Customer 3322.1101
Relationship
Crystallisation 8131.6800 8159.60 Manager
Attendant
Customs and 3351.9900 3441.90
Cultivator, Crop 6111.0200 6111.20 Border Inspectors,
Other
Cultivator, Fruit 6111.0800 6112.10
Cutter Driver 8160.4200 8276.71
Cultivator, General 6111.0100 6111.10
Cutter Tent 7532.1300 7435.60
Cultivator, 6111.1300 6111.30
Vegetables Cutter, Fur 7531.1500 7434.40
Curator (Museum) 2621.0200 2431.20 Cutter, Garment 7532.1000 7435.45
(Leather)
Cushion Maker 7534.0400 7437.40
Cutter, Glass 7315.1800 7322.45
Customer Care 5244.0301
Bangles
Executive
Cutter, Gloves 7532.1100 7435.50
Customer Care 5244.0303
(Leather)
Executive (Call
Centre) Cutter, Goods and 7532.1001
Garments
Customer Care 5242.0201
(Leather)
Executive
(Relationship Cutter, Hand 7536.0500 7442.18
Centre)
Cutter, Hand 7532.0700 7435.35
Customer Care 5242.0301 (Textile Product)
Executive (Repair
Centre) Cutter, Machine 7532.0900 7435.40
(Textile Product)
Customer 3113.0701
Inspection Cutter, 8156.0701 8266.22
Technician Machine/Cutter
VOLUME I 267
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
(Footwear) Worker
Cutter, Paper 8171.1600 8143.30 Dairy Processing 8160.0500 8272.30
Equipment
Cutter, Paper Pulp 8171.0500 8142.30 Operator
Cutting Machine 8160.1700 8274.30 Dairy Products 7513.9900 7413.90
Operator Makers, Others
(Confectionery)
Dairy Scientist 2132.0700 2213.70
Cutting Machine 8160.8700 8279.40
Operator, Tobacco Dairy Technologist 2141.1900 2149.57
Cutting, Crimping 8212.0401 Dairy Worker, 7513.0100 7413.10
and Connector General
Assembly
Operator Damping Machine 8154.1700 8264.77
Attendant
Cutting, Lasting 8156.9900 8266.90
and Sewing Dance Director 2654.0300 2455.30
Machine
Dancer 2653.0300 2454.30
Operators, Other
Darner 7533.0600 7436.35
Cycle Tube 8141.2300 8231.87
Reverser
DAS Set-Top Box 7422.1203
Installer and
Cylinder Borer 7223.1800 8211.42
Service Technician
Cynideman 8112.0400 8112.30
Data 2523.0100 2131.20
Cytologist 2131.0300 2211.20 Communication
Analyst/Network
Daftry 4419.0600 5132.10 Administrator
Dairy and 6121.9900 6121.90 Data Entry Clerks, 4132.9900 4114.90
Livestock Other
Producers, Other
Data Entry 4132.0401 4113.35
Dairy Farm 6121.0601 6121.35 Machine Operator
Worker,
General/Dairy Data Recovery 3512.0100 3121.35
VOLUME I 268
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Planner/System Preservation)
Administrator
Delimer 7535.0600 7441.24
Database 2522.0100 2139.30
Administrator Delivery 8321.0201
Associate/Two
Database Design 2521.0100 2139.20 Wheeler Delivery
Analyst Associate
Debt Collectors 4214.9900 4215.90 Demographer 2632.0400 2442.30
and Related
Workers, Other Dent 7213.0301 7213.30
Remover/Auto
Debt Recovery 4214.0201 Body Repair
Agents Technician/
Denter
Decorator 3432.0200 3471.10
Dental Assistant 3251.0101 3225.10
Decorator 7316.0800 7324.30
(Ceramics) Dental Assistants 3251.9900 3225.90
and Therapists,
Decorators and 3432.9900 3471.90 Other
Commercial
Designers, Other Dental Specialists, 2261.9900 2225.90
Other
Deep Cell 7542.0800 7119.70
Attendant Dentist 2261.0100 2225.10
Deep Sea Fishery 6223.9900 6153.90 Deodorizer 8131.6700 8159.58
Workers, Other
Deployment 2511.0101
De-Gummer, Silk 8154.0600 8264.62 Engineer
Dehairer, Hand 7535.0400 7441.20 Depot Starter, 1324.1800 1226.65
Tram
Dehairer, 8155.0100 8265.10
Machine/Dehairer Dermatologist 2212.0200 2221.40
Machine Operator
Derrick Crane 8343.0800 8333.24
Dehydrator 8160.3200 8275.72 Operator
Tender (Canning &
VOLUME I 269
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Articles
Derrick Crane 8343.0900 8333.28
Operator,
Designer, Machine 2144.0200 2145.15
Magnetic
Design-For- 2151.0701
Derrickman 8113.0200 8113.15
Manufacture
Engineer
Design Engineer 2151.0201
Design-For-Test 2152.0502
Design Engineer 2152.0501
Engineer
Design Engineer 2523.0401
Desktop 3512.0200 3121.50
Publishing
Design Engineer – 2512.0601
Operator
Engineering
Analysis
Despatch Rider 8321.0200 8321.20
Design 2512.0203
Detective 3355.0300 3450.30
Engineer(Product
Engineer)
Developer, 8132.0300 7344.25
Automatic
Design 2163.0201
(Photofinishing)
Merchandiser
Developer, 8132.0200 7344.20
Designer - 2144.0201
Photographic
Mechanical
Dhobi 9121.0100 9133.10
Designer (CAD) 2166.0401
Diabetes Educator 3253.0101
Designer 7532.0100 7435.10
(Garment)
Dialysis Technician 3212.0201 3211.50
Designer, 2145.0200 2146.20
Dialysis Technician 3212.9900 3211.90
Chemical
Life Science
Engineering
Technicians, Other
Designer, 2151.0200 2143.20
Diamond Assorter 7313.1501
Electrical
Engineering
Diamond Bagger 9321.1103
and Flueter
Designer, Leather 7532.0200 7435.15
VOLUME I 270
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Media Manager
Diamond Driller 8111.0400 8111.40
Diplomat 1112.0200 1121.20
Die Bonding 8212.1702
Operator
Director 1120.1800 1214.20
Manufacturing
Die Casting 8121.4200 8122.74
Machine Operator
Director, Airport 1120.2600 1215.40
Die Copying 7223.2800 8211.70
Director, Bank 1120.0700 1212.10
Machine
Operator/Die
Director, 1120.2500 1215.30
Sinking Electric
Communication
Discharge
Machine Operator Director, 1120.1300 1213.50
Construction
Die Designer 3115.1200 3115.50
Director, Disaster 1114.0300 1143.10
Die Maker 7222.0500 7222.50
Management
Services
Die Sinker, Hand 7222.0600 7222.60
Director, 1120.0400 1211.40
Dietician Assistant 2265.0201
Electricity
Dietician, General 2265.0200 3223.20
Director, Gas 1120.0500 1211.50
Dieticians and 2265.9900 3223.90
Director, 1120.0800 1212.20
Nutritionists,
Insurance
Other
Director, Lodging 1120.3000 1217.20
Digester Operator, 3139.0100 8142.20
and Catering
Paper Pulp
Services/Director
Food and
Digester Operator, 6210.1800 6142.20
Beverage Service
Wood
Director, Mines 1120.1400 1213.60
Digger (Mine & 9311.0200 9311.20
Quarry)
Director, 1120.3700 1219.30
Museum/Zoo
Digital 2432.0201
Marketing/Social
Director, Music 2654.0200 2455.20
VOLUME I 271
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Director, Other 1120.3600 1219.20 Dispensing 3254.9900
Services Opticians, Other
Director, Quarry 1120.1500 1213.70 Distiller (Chemical) 8131.3900 8154.65
Director, 1120.3300 1218.20 Distiller, 6210.1900 6142.30
Recreation and Turpentine and
Entertainment Eucalyptus
Director, Research 2654.0400 2455.40 Distributor (Letter 7321.0300 7341.25
(Motion Picture, Press)
Radio & TV)
Distributor Sales 5243.0401
Director, Retail 1120.2200 1214.60 Representative
Trade
District and 2612.0300 2422.30
Director, Storage 1120.2800 1216.20 Session Judge
and Warehousing
Diver, Chank 7541.0200 6152.40
Director, 2654.0100 2455.10
Theatrical Diver, Pearl 7541.0100 6152.30
Director, 1120.2400 1215.20 Dividing Machine 7223.2700 8211.66
Transport Operator
Director, Water 1120.0600 1211.60 Document 2622.0601
Supply Coder/Processor
Director, Well 1120.1600 1213.80 Doffer, Fly 8152.0200 7432.12
Drilling Frame/Speed
Frame Operator
Director, 1120.2100 1214.50
Wholesale Trade Doffer, 7318.4800 7432.32
Spinning/Ring
Disc Jockey 2656.0200 3472.20 Spinning Doffer
Disc Operator 8131.3000 8153.65 Doll Maker 7533.1200 7436.80
(Abrasive)
Domestic and 9111.9900 9131.90
Disk Duplicator 3512.0401 Related Helpers,
Cleaners and
VOLUME I 272
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Launderers, Other Civil
Domestic Data 4132.0402 Draughtperson, 3118.0300 3118.30
Entry Operator Electrical
Domestic 5152.9900 Draughtperson, 3118.0401 3118.40
Housekeepers, Mechanical
Others
Draughtperson, 3118.0500 3118.50
Domestic IT 3512.0101 Structural
Helpdesk
Attendant Draughtperson, 3118.0600 3118.60
Topographical
Domestic Servant 9111.0100 9131.10
Draughtpersons, 3118.9900 3118.90
Doorkeepers, 9629.9900 9152.90 Other
Watchpersons and
Related Workers, Draughtsman – 3118.0402
Other Mechanical
Door-to-Door and 5243.9900 9113.90 Drawer (Glass) 7315.0900 7322.26
Telephone Sales
Drawing Man 8152.0100 7432.10
Persons, Other
Drawing Tenter 8151.0700 8261.40
Dorr Clarifier 8160.3600 8276.30
Operator
Dredger Operator 8342.0900 8332.26
Doubling Machine 8151.0400 8261.25
Dress Diver 7541.0600 7216.10
Operator (Textile)
Dresser 2240.0400 3221.40
Dowell Machine 7523.1400 7423.70
Operator
Dresser, Stage & 5142.0500 5141.60
Studio
Draftsman 3118.0301
Dressmaker/Ladie 7531.0200 7433.15
Dragline Operator 8342.0800 8332.24
s Dressmaker
Draughtperson, 3118.0100 3118.10
Drier and Cooler 8160.8600 8279.30
Architectural
Operator, Tobacco
Draughtperson, 3118.0200 3118.20
VOLUME I 273
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Engine (Electrical)
Drier, Handmade 8171.2100 8143.55
Paper
Driver, Railway 8311.0200 8311.20
Engine (Steam)
Driller Metal, 7223.1500 8211.36
General
Driver, Shunting 8311.0500 8311.50
(Loco)
Driller Wood 7523.1300 7423.65
Driver, Steam 8343.0100 8333.10
Driller, Hand 8111.2200 7111.74
Crane
Driller, Machine 8111.0200 8111.20
Driver, Taxi 8322.0201 8322.20
Drilling Operator 8212.2502
Driving Assistant 9122.0301
Driver Auto 8321.0101 8321.10
Drum Maker, 7312.1400 7312.50
Rickshaw
Musical
Driver Road Test 8331.0500 8323.50
Drum Man 7535.1200 7441.36
(Tanning)
Driver Truck 8332.0100 8324.10
Dry Cleaner, Hand 9121.0300 9133.30
Driver, Ambulance 8322.0301 8322.30
Dry Cleaner, 8157.0300 8264.30
Driver, Bus 8331.0300 8323.30
Machine
Driver, Car 8322.0100 8322.10
Dry Cleaner, Spot 9121.0700 9133.70
Driver, Cycle 9331.0100 9331.10
Drying Chamber 8131.1400 8152.30
Rickshaw
Attendant
Driver, Fire 8331.0400 8323.40 (Drugs)/Chamber
Brigade Vehicles Operators
Driver, 8350.0500 8340.30 Drying Chamber 8131.1500 8152.35
Launch/Tug Attendant (Match
Master Boxes)/Chamber
Operators
Driver, Railway 8311.0300 8311.30
Engine (Diesel) Drying Machine 8157.0200 8264.20
Operator
Driver, Railway 8311.0400 8311.40
VOLUME I 274
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Operators, Other
DTH Set-Top Box 7422.1202
Installer and
Ecologist 2133.0100 2211.25
Service Technician
Economic Botanist 2131.0500 2211.37
Dumper Operator 8342.1202
Economic 3314.0100 3433.10
Dumper 8342.1201 8332.32
Investigator
Operator/Dumper
/Tipper Operator
Economist 2631.0100 2441.10
Duplicating 4132.0800 4113.65
Economists, Other 2631.9900 2441.90
Machine
Operator/Photoco Edge Burnisher 8156.2300 8266.60
pier
Edge Finisher 7315.1700 7322.40
Dusting Man, 9112.0100 9132.10 (Glass)
Office; Farash,
Office/Housekeepi Edge Operator 8181.2900 8139.70
ng Attendant (Abrasive)
Dye Automation 8154.1100 8264.69 Edge Setter, 8156.2200 8266.55
Operator (Textile)/ Machine
Dyeing Machine
Operator Edger (Optical 7315.1300 7322.32
glass)
Dyed- Yarn 8154.0900 8264.67
Operator (Textile) Editor 2641.0300 2451.20
Dyeing and 2141.1600 2149.45 Education 2351.9900 2331.90
Bleaching Master Methods
(Textiles) Specialists, Other
Dyer Garment 8154.1500 8264.75 Elected Official, 1111.0300 1113.10
Local Bodies
Dyer, Leather 7535.1400 7441.40
Elected Official, 1111.0200 1112.10
Ear, Nose and 2212.0400 2221.45 State Government
Throat Specialist
Elected Official, 1111.0100 1111.10
Earth Moving and 8342.9900 8332.90 Union
Related Plant
VOLUME I 275
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Government
Electrical Fitter 7412.0200 7241.20
Electric Motor 8212.0500 8282.50
Electrical Line 7413.9900 7245.90
Winder
Installers,
Repairers and
Electrical and 8212.9900 8283.90
Cable Jointers,
Electronic
Other
Equipment
Assemblers, Other
Electrical 7412.9900 7241.90
Mechanics and
Electrical and 7419.9900 7249.90
Fitters, Other
Electronic
Equipment
Electrical 3123.0400 7138.40
Mechanics and
Supervisor, Wiring,
Fitters and Related
Workers, Other
Electrical Switch 3131.0600 8161.50
Board Operator
Electrical 8212.0402
Assembly
Electrical 8212.2401
Operator
Technician
Electrical Design 2151.0202
Electrical 3113.0200 3113.20
Developer
Technician (High
Voltage)
Electrical 2151.0100 2143.10
Engineer, General
Electrical 3113.9900 3113.90
Technicians, Other
Electrical 2151.0300 2143.30
Engineer,
Electrician (Mines) 7411.0200 7137.15
Generation and
Supply Electrician, 7412.0600 7241.60
Aircraft
Electrical 3113.0101 3113.10
Engineering, Electrician, 7412.0701 7241.70
Technician/Mainte Automobile
nance Technician
Electrical Electrician, 7411.0100 7137.10
General
Electrical 2151.9900 2143.90
Engineers, Other Electrician, Stage 7411.0600 7137.40
VOLUME I 276
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
and Studio
Elephant Keeper 6121.1100 6121.60
Electronic 2152.0200 2144.60
Eliminator 8160.5200 8276.81
Engineer
Attendant, Sugar
Electronic Fitters, 7421.9900 7243.90
Embalmer 5163.0200 5143.20
Mechanics and
Servicers, Other
Embedded 2512.0501
Software Engineer
Electronic 2152.0801
Hardware Design
Embosser, Leather 7535.1500 7441.42
Engineer
Embosser, Sheet 7313.2200 7313.75
Electronic 7421.0300 7243.10
Mechanic Embossing 4132.0900 4113.70
Machine Operator
Electronic Sub- 8212.2601
Assembly Embossing 8142.1000 8232.50
Technician Machine Operator
(Plastic)
Electronics and 3114.9900 3114.90
Telecommunicatio Embossing 8142.0900 8232.45
ns Engineering Machine Setter
Technicians, Other (Plastic)
Electronics 2152.9900 2144.90 Embroider, 8153.0500 8263.45
Engineers, Other Machine
Electronics Fitter, 7421.0100 7242.10 Embroidery 8153.0600 8263.50
General Machine Operator
(Semi-Automatic)
Electronics 3114.0100 3114.10
Technician Embroidery 8153.0601
Machine Operator
Electro-Optical 2152.0400 2144.70
(Zig Zag Machine)
Engineer
Emergency 2240.0502
Electroplater 8122.0100 8223.10
Medical
Technician –
Electrotyper 7321.0700 7342.30
Advanced
VOLUME I 277
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Transition
Emergency 2240.0501
Medical
Engineer – 3512.0801
Technician – Basic
Technical Support
Employment 2424.0200 2412.20
Engineer Trainee – 2512.0207
Officer/Operation
Engineering
Head,
Analysis
Employment
Engineer Trainee – 2512.0206
Enameller, 8122.2000 8223.20
IT Services
Chemical
Engineer, 2142.1000 2142.72
Encapsulation 8142.0503
Waterworks
Operator
Engineering 2141.0800 2149.84
Energy Auditor 3113.0300 3113.30
Estimator/Estimati
on Engineer
Energy Economist 2631.0200 2441.20
Engineering 3122.5700 7248.20
Energy Meter 8212.2001
Supervisor,
Assembly
Telephone
Operator
Engineers and 2149.0100 2149.90
Engine Tester 7231.0200 7231.20
Related
Technologists,
Engine Tester, 7232.0300 7232.30
Other
Aircraft
Engraver 7313.1900 7313.71
Engine Tester, 7232.0400 7232.40
Helper, Aircraft
Engraver, Glass 7316.0100 7323.10
Engineer – 2511.0103
Enlarger, 8132.0400 7344.30
Packaging
Photographic
Engineer – 2511.0104
Entomologist 2131.1000 2211.65
Product Lifecycle
Management
Envelope Maker, 8143.0200 8253.20
(PLM)
Machine
Engineer – 2511.0102
Environment 3257.0300 3214.10
Software
VOLUME I 278
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Science and Designer
Protection
Technician, Equity Dealer 3311.0201
Including Health
Erector, Machine 8211.1000 8281.55
Environment 3257.9900 3214.90 and Equipment
Science and
Erector, Structural 7214.0600 7214.60
Protection
Technicians, Other
Estate Agents, 3334.9900 3413.90
Other
Environment 2133.0200 2211.27
Scientist (Including
Estimator, Timber 6210.1400 6141.75
Health)
Etcher Photo 7321.1600 7343.50
Environmental and 2263.9900 3152.90
Engraving
Occupational
Health and
Evaporator 8131.3600 8154.40
Hygiene
Operator
Professionals,
Other
Evaporator 8160.3700 8276.40
Operator, Sugar
Environmental 3257.0400 3214.20
Compliance
E-Waste Collector 9611.0201
Inspector
Examiner, 7543.0300 3152.30
Environmental 3257.0500 3214.30
(Footwear)/Qualit
Engineering
y Controller
Technician
Examiner, Dry 7543.0400 3152.40
EOT Crane 8343.0501
Cleaning/Fabric
Operator
Inspection
Operator
Epigraphist 2633.0300 2443.30
Examiner, Wood 7543.0500 3152.50
Equal Opportunity 3412.0200 3460.20
Working
Officer
Excavator 8342.2001
Equestrian 2659.0300 3474.20
Operator
Equipment 2144.0301
Executive Chef 1120.3100 1217.30
VOLUME I 279
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Operator, Clay
Executive Official, 1112.0500 1122.20
State Government
Extrusion Press 8121.5600 8124.50
Operator
Executive Officials, 1112.0300 1121.30
Union
Eyelet Holing 8153.0300 8263.30
Government
Machine Operator
Executive, Proto 3115.0301
Eyeleting Machine 8156.2500 8266.68
Manufacturing
Operator
Exhaust Box 8160.2900 8275.60
Factory 7543.4001
Operator (Food
Compliance
Canning and
Auditor
Preserving)
Family Planning 2635.0900 2446.60
Exhaust Fan 3132.1100 8169.50
Organizer
Operator
Farm Hands and 9211.9900 9201.90
Export Assistant 3322.6011
Labourers, Other
Export Executive 3322.6001
Farm Machinery 8341.9900 8331.90
Operators, Other
Export Manager 1219.0101
Farm Overseer, 2132.1000 3213.10
Extra 2655.0200 2455.60
Crop Production
Extraction 8131.8500 8159.88
Farmer, 6121.0201 6121.15
Attendant,
Dairy/Dairy
Chemical
Farmer/Entrepren
eur
Extruding Machine 8142.0400 8232.20
Operator (Plastic)
Farmer, Fur- 6129.0100 6129.10
Bearing Animals
Extruding Machine 8141.0300 8231.20
Operator (Rubber)
Farmer, Livestock 6121.0100 6121.10
Extruding Machine 8142.0300 8232.18
Farmer, Poultry 6122.0200 6122.20
Setter (Plastic)
Breeding
Extruding Press 8181.0500 8131.23
Farmer, 6122.0101 6122.10
VOLUME I 280
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Poultry/Broiler
Field Crop and 6111.9900 6111.90
Farm Supervisor
Vegetable
Growers, Other
Farrier 7221.0600 7221.60
Field Engineer – 7421.1001
Fashion and 5241.9900 5210.90
RACW
Models, Other
Field Engineer TV 7421.1302
Fashion Designer 2163.0500 3471.40
Field Maintenance 3114.0701
Fault Controller, 7422.0600 7244.60
Engineer
Telephones
Field Officer, 2433.0700 3415.50
Fault Management 7422.0201
Insurance
Engineer
Field Sales 5243.0501
Feed Extruder 8141.0301
Executive (FSE)
Operator
Field Service 2424.0502
Fermentation Man 8160.7100 8278.16
Trainer
Ferry Officer 3152.0900 3142.85
Field Technician: 7422.2001
(Computing and
Fetler (Woollen 8151.2200 8261.89
Peripherals)
Textile)
Field Technician: 7422.2101
Fettler (Brick & 8114.0700 8212.70
(Networking and
Tile)
Storage)
Fiberglass – 8181.3300 8139.85
Field Technician: 7421.0401
Machine Operator
Air-Conditioner
Fibre Preparer, 7318.2300 7431.42
Field Technician: 7421.0901
Coir
Digital Camera
Fibre Preparing, 8151.9900 8261.90
Field Technician: 7421.0701
Spinning and
Other Home
Winding Machine
Appliances
Operators, Other
Field Technician: 7421.0501
Fibre Technologist 2141.1300 2149.30
VOLUME I 281
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Refrigerator
Filter Press 8160.1300 8273.65
Operator (Oil)
Field Technician: 7421.0801
UPS and Inverter
Filter Pressman 8160.3500 8276.20
Field Technician: 7421.0601
Filterman 8160.7400 8278.25
Washing Machine
Final Assembly 8212.2101
Fieldman, 6111.2000 6111.50
Operator-
Agriculture
Magnetics
Fieldman, Fish 6224.0700 6159.25
Final Assortment 3122.6509
Supervisor
Fifth Engineer, 3151.0500 3141.50
Ship/Junior
Final Product QC 7543.0702
Engineer
Technician
Filer and 7313.0103
Final Quality 7313.2601
Assembler
Inspector
Filler, Aerated 8160.8300 8278.65
Final Testing 3113.0802
Water
Technician
Filler, Aerated 8160.8400 8278.70
Finance Agent 3312.0100 3411.50
Water, Hand
Machine
Finance Managers, 1211.9900 1231.9
Others
Film Developing 8132.0800 8224.20
Machine Operator
Finance, Insurance 3321.0201
and Registration
Film Editor/Editor 3521.0501 3131.50
Co-Ordinator
Film Splitter, Mica 7542.0700 7119.60
Financial Analyst 2412.0200 2411.50
Filter Press 8131.2300 8153.10
Operator Financial and 1346.9900 1227.90
Insurance Service
Filter Press 8131.2400 8153.15 Branch Managers,
Operator Other
(Ceramics)
Financial and 2412.9900 2411.90
VOLUME I 282
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Investment
Firing Machine 8160.6200 8277.35
Advisors, Other
Attendant (Tea)
Financial Examiner 2412.0100 2411.40
Fish Curer 6224.1000 6159.40
Fingerprint Expert 3119.0300 3119.30
Fish Hatcher 6224.0900 6159.35
Finisher 7312.0800 7312.30
Fish Meal Maker 6224.1100 6159.45
(Harmonium)
Fish Overseer 6224.0500 6159.10
Finisher Feeder, 7318.4000 7431.75
Jute
Fisheries Inspector 6224.0600 6159.20
Finisher, Paper 8171.1700 8143.35
Fisherman, Deep 6223.0101 6153.10
Sea/Marine
Finishing Operator 8141.1000 8231.60
Capture
(Rubber Tube)
Fisherman
Finishing Operator 8141.0800 8231.45
Fisherman, 6222.0200 6152.20
(Rubber Tyre)
Estuaries, Coastal
and Backwater
Fire Fighter 5411.0100 5161.10
Fisherman, Inland 6222.0100 6152.10
Fire Fighters, 5411.9900 5161.90
Water
Other
Fitness and 3423.9900
Fire Inspectors, 3119.1000 3151.90
Recreation
Other
Instructors and
Programme
Fire Officer 3119.0900 3151.20
Leaders
Fire Prevention 3119.0800 3151.10
Fitness 3423.0101
Officer
Trainer/Fitness
Fire Protection 2142.0501 Instructor
Systems Design
Fitter – Electrical 7412.0201
Engineer
and Electronic
Fireman, 8182.0800 8162.75 Assembly
Locomotive
Fitter – Fabrication 7224.0102
VOLUME I 283
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
System
Fitter Automobile 7231.0400 7231.40
Fitter-Mechanical 8211.1202
Fitter Electrical 7412.0203
Assembly
Assembly
Flake Miller, 8160.1900 8274.50
Fitter Electronic 7421.0101
Wheat and Oats
Assembly
(Grain-Feed Mills)
Fitter 7311.0401
Flat Knitter, 8152.0600 8262.30
Instrumentation
Machine/Knitting
Machine Operator
Fitter Levelling, 7233.0121
– Flat Knitting
Alignment &
Balancing
Flattening 8121.2400 8122.38
Machine and
Fitter, Bench 7233.0200 7233.20
Flying Shear
Fitter, Bicycle 7233.2600 7233.66 Operator (Non-
Ferrous Metal)
Fitter, 7214.0800 7214.70
Construction Flayer 7535.0200 7441.15
Fitter, General 7233.0100 7233.10 Flesher, Hand 7535.0500 7441.22
Fitter, Loco 7233.2400 7233.64 Flesher, 8155.0201 8265.20
Machine/Fleshing
Fitter, Marine 7233.2200 7233.62 Operator
Fitter, Railway 7233.2300 7233.63 Flight Attendants 4221.0200
Carriage and and Travel
Wagon Stewards
Fitter, Signal 7233.2700 7233.70 Flight Engineer 3153.1100 3143.84
Fitter, Stationery 7233.2100 7233.60 Flight Operation 1324.1000 1226.37
Steam Engine Officer, Air Service
Fitter, Structural 7214.0700 7214.65 Flight Steward 5111.0400 5111.40
Fitter: Hydraulic 7233.2901 Floor Layers and 7122.9900 7132.90
and Pneumatic TFlioleo Sr eMttaenrsa,g Oert her 3322.1305
VOLUME I 284
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Technician
Floral Designer 3435.0500 3471.60
Forest Fire 6210.0300 6141.20
Floriculturist – 6113.0601
Watcher
(Open Cultivation)
Forest Guard 6210.0200 6141.15
Floriculturist – 6113.0602
(Protected
Forester 6210.0100 6141.10
Cultivation)
Foresters and 6210.0400 6141.25
Flour Mill 8160.1000 8273.40
Related Workers
Operator
Forestry and 6210.9900 6141.90
Flower Maker, 8143.0400 8253.40
Related Workers,
Paper
Other
Fluffer, Hand 7535.0900 7441.30
Forestry Labourers 9215.9900 9202.90
and Related
Fluid Management 3135.2001
Workers, Other
Operator Rolling
Mills
Forging Operator 7221.0301
Folder, 8159.0100 8269.10
Forging Shop Shift 3122.4501
Machine/Folding
In-Charge
Machine Operator
Forging Shop 3122.4502
Food and 7515.9900 7415.90
Supervisor
Beverage Tasters
and Graders,
Fork Lift Truck 8344.0201 8334.20
Other
Operator/Fork Lift
Operator/Driver
Food and Related 8160.9900
Products Machine
Form Layer, Cable 8212.1000 8283.40
Operators
(Telephone
Equipment
Foodstuff Freezer 8160.3000 8275.65
Manufacturing)
Foreman, Blast 3122.0200 8128.20
Four Cutter 7523.0700 7423.40
Furnace
Fourth Engineer, 3151.0400 3141.40
Forensic Science 3119.0200 3119.20
Ship
VOLUME I 285
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Preservers, Others
FPGA Design 2512.0401
Engineer
Functional Tester 7543.0801
Frame Maker, Cap 7532.0500 7435.25
Functional Tester 7543.0901
– Medical Devices
Framer – 8153.0701
Computerised
Functional Tester 7543.1001
Embroidery
– RAC
Machine
Functional Tester 7543.1002
Freelance 2642.0300 2451.40
– TV
Journalist
Fur And Leather 8155.9900 8265.90
Freight Handlers, 9333.9900 9333.90
Preparing Machine
Other
Operators, Other
Fret Saw Machine 7523.1700 8241.20
Furnace Helper 8181.3400
Operator
Furnace Man, Bidi 7516.0800 7416.45
Friction Machine 8131.4400 8222.50
Operator (Match)
Furnace Man, 8181.1200 8131.50
Glass/Furnace
Friends of Coconut 6111.0852
Operator
Tree
Furnace Man, 3135.2600 8122.48
Front Sizer (Cotton 8152.2000 8262.85
Reverberatory,
Textile)
Pulverised Coal
Fired
Frontline Health 3253.0201
Worker
Furnace Operator 3133.0200 8152.60
(Chemical)
Frontman 7322.1600 7346.60
Furnace Operator 3135.0900 8121.47
Fruit Press 8160.2400 8275.30
(Non-Ferrous
Operator (Food
Metal)
Canning and
Preserving)
Furnace Operator 3135.1300 8121.70
(Smelting &
Fruits, Vegetables 7514.9900 7414.90
Refining)
and Related
VOLUME I 286
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Furnace Operator, 3135.1100 8121.55 Garnett 8151.0100 8261.10
Open Hearth Machineman,
Woollen
Furnace Operator, 3135.1200 8121.60
Second Hand, Gas Cutter 7212.0400 7212.40
Open Hearth
Gas Metal Arc 7212.0303
Furniture Designer 2163.0400 3471.20 Welder/Metal
Inert Gas/Metal
Furniture Maker, 7317.0300 7424.10 Active Gas/Gas
Bamboo Metal Arc Welder
(MIG/MAG/GMA
Furniture Maker, 7317.0500 7424.20
W)
Cane
Gas Storage 8131.8300 8159.86
Furniture Maker, 7317.0400 7424.15
Attendant
Reed
Gas Supervisor 3121.0800 8118.50
Furniture Maker, 7522.0100 7422.10
Wood Gas-Compressor 3132.0300 8163.30
Operator
Galvanizer/Operat 8122.3500 8223.35
or – Electroplating, Gateman/Unarme 5414.0501 9152.30
Galvanising d Security Guard
Garbage Collector 9611.0100 9161.10 Gatherer (Glass) 7315.0800 7322.24
(Motor Transport)
Gatherer Lac 6210.0500 6141.30
Garbage 9611.9900 9161.90
Collectors, Other Gatherer, 6210.0700 6141.40
Firewood
Gardener, General 6113.0301 6113.30
Gatherer, 6210.0600 6141.35
Garment and 7532.9900 7435.90 Medicinal Herbs
Related Pattern
Makers and Gauger 8113.0700 8113.40
Cutters, Other
Gauger (Cement) 8131.2900 8153.60
Garment Cutter 7532.0901
(CAM) Gear Cutter 7223.1300 8211.32
VOLUME I 287
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Gem Cleaver 7313.1101 7313.50 General Duty 5329.0101
Assistant
Gem Driller 7313.1701 7313.68
General Manager, 1311.0300 1301.10
Gem Grinder, 7313.1300 7313.55 Agricultural Farm
Hand
General Manager, 1211.0100 1307.10
Gem Grinder, 8189.0100 8290.50 Bank
Machine
General Manager, 1330.0600 1306.20
Gem Polisher, 7313.1400 7313.60 Communication
Hand
General Manager, 1323.0300 1303.10
Gem Polisher, 8189.0200 8290.60 Construction/Gen
Machine eral Manager
Construction
Gem 7313.1001 7313.45
Projects
Slicer/Gemstone
Rough Cutter General Manager, 1311.0500 1301.50
Dairy Farm
Gem Sorter 7313.0901 7313.35
General Manager, 1321.0700 1302.40
Gemstone Facet 7313.1303
Electricity
Maker
General Manager, 1321.0800 1302.50
Gemstone Final 7313.1602
Gas
Shaper and
Calibrator General Manager, 1311.0200 1301.30
Horticulture
Gemstone Girdle 7313.1505
Polisher General Manager, 1211.0200 1307.20
Insurance
Gemstone Polisher 7313.1506
General Manager, 1311.0400 1301.40
Gemstone Pre- 7313.1601
Livestock Farm
Shaper
General Manager, 1411.0200 1305.10
Gemstone Thread 7313.0202
Lodging and
Maker
Catering Services
Genealogist 2632.1000 2442.77
VOLUME I 288
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Wholesale Trade
General Manager, 1321.1000 1302.70
Manufacturing
Generalist Medical 2211.9900 2221.90
Practitioners,
General Manager, 1322.0400 1302.10
Allopathic, Other
Mine
Geographer 2632.1200 2442.85
General Manager, 1311.0100 1301.20
Plantation
Geologist 2114.0100 2114.10
General Manager, 1311.0600 1301.60
Geologist, 2114.1500 2114.15
Poultry
Petroleum
General Manager, 1322.0500 1302.20
Geologists and 2114.9900 2114.90
Quarry
Geophysicists,
Other
General Manager, 1431.0100 1309.10
Recreation and
Geophysicist 2114.0400 2114.40
Entertainment
Gill Box Man 7318.3500 7431.68
General Manager, 1420.0500 1304.20
Retail Trade,
Glass and 8181.9900 8139.90
Senior Manager,
Ceramics Plant
Retail Trade
Operators, Other
General Manager, 1324.2200 1306.30
Glass Cutter, 7315.2000 7322.55
Storage and
Other
Warehousing
Glass Enameller 7316.0600 7324.10
General Manager, 1324.2100 1306.10
Transport Glass Etcher 7316.0200 7323.20
General Manager, 1321.0900 1302.60 Glass Makers, 7315.9900 7322.90
Water Supply Cutters, Grinders
and Finishers,
General Manager, 1322.0600 1302.30
Other
Well Drilling
Glass Technologist 2141.2200 2149.70
General Manager, 1420.0400 1304.10
Wholesale Glaze Maker 8181.2800 8139.65
Trade/Senior
Manager,
VOLUME I 289
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Glazer 7223.2100 8211.50 Government Social 3353.9900 3443.90
Benefits Officials,
Glazer, Pottery 7316.1000 7324.50 Other
and Porcelain
Government Tax 3352.9900 3442.90
Glazier 7125.0100 7135.10 and Excise
(Construction) Officials, Other
Glazier, Vehicle 7125.0200 7135.20 Grader (Wood 7521.0500 7421.50
Working)
Glaziers, Other 7125.9900 7135.90
Grader and 7531.1400 7434.30
Gold Curer, 7313.0301 7313.18
Matcher, Fur
General/Gold
Refiner Grader Operator 8342.0400 8332.16
Gold Curer, 7313.0401 7313.20 Grader, Coir 7318.1300 7431.18
Mint/Gold Melter
and Refiner Grader, Meat 7515.0400 7415.40
Gold Foil Maker 7313.0500 7313.22 Grading Machine 8131.0900 8151.65
Attendant
Goldsmith 7313.0700 7313.28 (Abrasive)
Goldsmith 7313.0702 Graduating 8181.2000 8131.80
Enameller Machine Operator
(Glass)
Goldsmith Frame 7313.0703
Maker Granulator 7314.1000 7329.20
Attendant
Goods Supervisor, 1324.1300 1226.52
(Cement)
Railway
Graphic Designer 2166.0501 3471.70
Goods Supervisor, 1324.1400 1226.54
Road Transport Grass Cutter 6121.1400 6121.75
Governess 5311.0300 5121.40 Grass Root 7422.0202
Telecom Provider
Government 2611.0500 2421.50
(GRTP)
Advocate
VOLUME I 290
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Grave Digger 5163.0300 5143.30 Gur Maker 8160.5500 8276.85
Greenhouse Fitter 6113.0501 Gynaecologist 2212.1200 2221.78
Grinder – Hand- 7224.0401 Hair Stylist 5141.0200 5141.15
Held and Power
Tools Hairdresser 5141.0100 5141.10
(Ladies)
Grinder (Stone 7315.2300 7329.15
and Clay) Hairdressers, 5141.9900
Other
Grinder, 7224.0200 7224.20
Crankshaft Hammer Man 7221.0400 7221.40
Grinder, General 7224.0100 7224.10 Hand Cart Man 9331.0300 9331.30
Grinder, Hand 7514.0300 7414.30 Hand Dyer 7318.0600 7332.60
(Food Grain)
Hand 7533.0201 7436.15
Grinder, Paper 8171.0200 8142.15 Embroiderer,
Pulp General
Grinder, Tool and 7223.2200 8211.55 Hand 7533.0300 7436.20
Cutter Embroiderer,
Zari/Hand
Groove Cutter, 8111.2000 7111.70 Embroider,
Mining Traditional Crafts
Groundsman 6113.0400 6113.40 Hand Packers, 9321.9900 9322.90
Others
Groundwater 2142.1001
Engineer Hand Painter 7316.0700 7324.20
(Ceramics)
Guard, Goods 5112.0200 5112.20
Train Hand Pedal 9331.9900 9331.90
Vehicle Drivers,
Guard, Passenger 5112.0100 5112.10 Other
Train
Hand Printer, 7318.0500 7332.50
Guides, Other 5113.9900 5113.90 Textile/Hand Block
VOLUME I 291
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Printer
Harness Maker 7536.1800 7442.72
Hand Sketch 2163.0301
Harvesting 8341.0201
Designer (Basic)
Machine Operator
Hand Spinner 7318.4200 7432.20
Hat Maker, 7531.0700 7433.40
(Cotton and
General
Woollen Textile)
Hatchery 6122.0401 6122.40
Handicraft 7318.9900 7432.90
Operator/Hatcher
Workers in
y In-Charge
Textiles, Leather
and Related
Hatchery 6221.0102
Materials, Others
Production
Worker
Handset Repair 7422.0203
Engineer (Level II)
Haulage Engine 8343.1500 8333.50
Driver
Handwork 2359.0100 3340.20
Teacher/Teacher,
Hawker 9520.0100 9112.10
Art and Craft
Head Cook/Head 3434.0100 5122.10
Handwriting 3119.0400 3119.35
Chef
Expert
Head Train 4323.0200 4133.20
Harbour Master 3152.0500 3142.50
Recorder
Hardener, Metal 8121.4800 8123.20
Headlight Keeper 3341.0700 4142.35
Hardness Tester, 8122.6900 8223.69
Headmaster 1345.0100 1229.20
Metal
Healdman (Textile) 8151.1200 8261.79
Hardware 2523.0501
Engineer Health Educator 2635.0600 2446.45
Harmonium Fitter 7312.0400 7312.20 Health Officer 2263.0100 2229.10
Harmonium Key 7312.0300 7312.18 Health, Safety and 3257.0600
Maker Environment
Officer
Harmonium Maker 7312.0200 7312.15
VOLUME I 292
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Machine
Heat Treater 8131.2200 8152.75
(Footwear)
Heat Treating 8121.3701 8122.64
Heel Padding 8156.2400 8266.65
Furnace Operator
Machine Operator
Heat Treatment 3135.3001
Heeler, 8156.1800 8266.40
Shop Supervisor
Machine/Heel
Attacher
Heating Plant 3132.0500 8163.50
Superintendent
Helper – Bottom 8156.2601
Making
Heating, 3115.1100 3115.40
(Footwear)
Ventilation and
Refrigeration
Helper – Dry 8155.1202
Engineering
Operations
Technician
(Finished Leather)
Heavy Duty End 7223.1400 8211.34
Helper – Finishing 8156.2603
Mill Operator
(Footwear)
Heavy Truck and 8332.9900 8324.90
Helper – Finishing 8155.1203
Lorry Drivers,
Operation(Finishe
Other
d Leather)
Heel Attacher, 7536.1600 7442.65
Helper – Finishing 8153.0703
Hand (Footwear)
Operations
(Leather Goods
Heel Breaster, 8156.0200 8266.12
and Garments)
Machine
(Footwear)/Machi
Helper – Parts 8153.0702
ne Operator –
Making (Leather
Heel Breasting
Goods and
Garments)
Heel Builder, 8156.0400 8266.16
Machine
Helper – Upper 8156.2602
(Footwear)/Machi
Making
ne Operator –
(Footwear)
Heel Building
Helper – Wet 8155.1201
Heel Compressor, 8156.1900 8266.42
Operations (Multi-
VOLUME I 293
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Skilled) Machine Operator
Helper Bar Bender 9313.0201 Historian 2633.0100 2443.10
and Fixer
Histotechnician 3212.0501
Helper Carpenter 9313.0401
– Shuttering & Hoist Operator 8343.1200 8333.35
Scaffolding
Home Delivery 1221.0301
Helper Electrician 9313.0501 Manager
Helper Laboratory 9313.0601 Home 5243.0300 9113.30
and Field Deliveryman
Technician
Home Economist 2631.0300 2441.30
Helper Mason 9313.0301
Home Guard 5414.0200 5169.20
Helper Painter and 9313.0701
Home Health Aide 5322.0101
Decorator
Home-Based 5322.9900 5133.90
Helpers and 9112.9900 9132.90
Personal Care
Cleaners in
Workers, Other
Offices, Hotels and
Other
Honer/Honing 7224.0600 7224.40
Establishments,
Machine Operator
Other
Hopper 3131.1000 8161.72
Herdsman 6121.0400 6121.25
Attendant/Hopper
Machine Operator
Hide and Skin 8155.0400 8265.30
Setter,
Horn Comb Maker 7536.2700 7442.85
Machine/Setting
(Hand)
Machine Operator
Horse Carriage 9332.0100 9332.10
Hide Shaver, 8155.0601 8265.35
Driver
Machine/Shaving
Operator
Horticulturist 2132.0200 2213.20
Hide Splitter, 8155.0500 8265.32
Hose Maker 8141.1400 8231.72
Machine/Splitting
VOLUME I 294
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
(Rubber Goods)
Hut Maker 7111.0100 7121.10
Hot Cell 3133.0800 8159.52
Hydraulic Engineer 2142.0500 2142.45
Technician
Hydro Extractor 8131.2700 8153.40
Hotel and 5151.0600 5121.60
Operator
Restaurant
Keeper/Hotel and
Hydrogenation 8131.6600 8159.56
Restaurant Owner
Operator (Oil &
Fats)/Oil and Fat
Hotel Concierge 9621.1200 9152.10
Plant Operator
Hotel Managers, 1411.9900 1225.90
Hydrographer, 2114.5500 2114.55
Others
Waterworks
Hotel 4224.9900
Hydrologist 2114.0500 2114.50
Receptionists,
Other
Ice Maker 3132.0100 8163.10
House Agent 3334.0200 3413.20
Ice-Cream Maker 7513.0500 7413.50
House 5151.0300 5121.30
ICT Engineer 3114.0801
Stewards/Domesti
c Help ICT Technician 3114.0802
Housekeeper 5152.0100 5121.20 Illumination 2151.0400 2143.40
(Domestic) Engineer
Housekeeper 5151.0101 5121.10 Impositor 7321.0200 7341.20
(Institutional)/Hou
sekeeping Impregnator, 7521.0200 7421.20
Supervisor Wood
Human Resource 2424.0300 2412.30 Impression Taker 3119.0500 3119.37
Manager
Incinerator and 3132.9900
Hunters and 6224.9900 6159.90 Water Treatment
Trappers, Other Plant Operators,
Other
Husker, Machine 8160.0800 8273.20
(Food Grains) Incinerator 3132.1300 8169.65
VOLUME I 295
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Operator Technicians, Other
In-Circuit Testing 7412.0102 Information and 7422.9900
Machine Operator Communications
Technology
Inclusion Plotter 7313.1201 Installers and
Servicers, Other
Incoming 4321.0302
Inspection Information 2432.0300 2419.30
Technician Officer
Incoming QC 7543.0701 Information 2356.9900 3340.90
Technician Technology
Trainers, Other
Industrial – 2634.0700 2445.70
Organizational Infrastructure 3513.0301
Psychologist Engineer
Industrial Engineer 2141.0300 2149.76 Infrastructure 7422.0204
Engineer
Industrial Engineer 2144.1302
(Workstation Injection Moulding 8142.0501 8232.25
Machine Operator
Design)
(Plastic)
Industrial Engineer 2141.0301
Injection Moulding 8141.0713
Executive
Operator
Industrial Robot 3139.9900 8172.90
Inland and Coastal 6222.9900 6152.90
Operators, Other
Water Fishery
Information and 1330.9900 Workers, Other
Communication
Inlayer, Metal 7313.2300 7313.78
Technology
Services Manager,
Inlayer, Wood 7522.1300 7422.45
Other
Inline Checker 7543.0302
Information and 3512.9900 3121.90
Communication
Inner Layer and 8212.2501
Technology User
Pressing Operator
Support
VOLUME I 296
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
DWDM
In-Process and 3113.0801
Final Quality
Installation 7422.0100 7244.10
Engineer
Mechanic
Inquiry Clerks, 4225.9900 4221.90
In-Store Promoter 5242.0401
Other
Instrument 2141.0200 2149.15
Insolvency 2619.0600 2429.45
Engineer/Instrume
Registrar
ntation Engineer
Inspector, 7419.0400 7249.40
Instrument Maker, 7311.1400 7311.85
Assembly
Other
(Telephone
Equipment
Instrumental 2652.0500 2453.50
Manufacturing)
Musician,
Percussion
Inspector, 3351.0100 3441.10
Instrument
Customs
Instrumental 2652.0400 2453.40
Inspector, Excise 3352.0100 3442.10
Musician, String
Instrument
Inspector, Police 3355.0100 3450.10
Instrumental 2652.0600 2453.60
Inspectors and 3341.0900 3431.20
Musician, Wind
Supervisors, Other
Instrument
(Clerical)
Insulation 7124.9900 7134.90
Installation 7422.2002
Workers, Other
(Computing and
Peripherals)
Insulator, Boilers 7124.0300 7134.30
and Pipes
Installation and 7422.1001
Service Engineer
Insulator, 7124.0400 7134.40
Refrigeration and
Installation 3114.0901
Air-Conditioning
Engineer – L2 & L3
Equipment
Installation 3114.0902
Insurance 3321.0200 3412.20
Engineer
Adjuster,
Installation
Examiner,
Engineer – SDH &
VOLUME I 297
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Surveyor and
Jewellery Engraver 7313.1800 7313.70
Investigator
Jewellery Polisher 7313.0101
Insurance Agent 3321.0100 3412.10
Jewellery Retail 5223.0103
Insurance 3321.9900 3412.90
Sales Associate
Representatives,
(Advanced)
Other
Jewellery Retail 5223.0102
Intellectual 2611.1001
Sales Associate
Property Executive
(Basic)
Interior Designer 3432.0100 3471.50
Jewellery, 7313.9900 7313.90
Goldsmith and
Internal Mixer 8141.0715
Silversmith
Operator
Workers, Other
Interpreter 2643.0300 2444.30
Jig and Fixture 7222.0300 7222.30
Marker
Inventory Clerk 4321.0102
Jig Borer 7222.0400 7222.40
Inventory 4321.0103
Manager
Jiggerman (Cotton 8154.1000 8264.68
Textile)/Jigger
Inventory 4322.0101
Machine Operator
Manager
(Wholesale)
Jobber (Textile) 3122.2800 8268.10
Issuing and Return 9321.1102
Jobber, Share 3311.0200 3411.20
In-Charge
Market
IT Co-Ordinator in 3512.0501
Jockey 3421.0200 3475.30
School
Joiner, Glass 7315.2100 7322.60
Jackman 8111.2500 7111.77
Bangles
Janitor/Housekeep 5151.0201 5121.15
Joiner, Wood 7115.0500 7124.35
ing Attendant
Jointer Machine 7523.1200 7423.60
Jewel 7313.0801 7313.30
Operator
Setter/Setter
VOLUME I 298
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Judge, High Court 2612.0200 2422.20 Key Account 5249.0101
Service Manager
Judge, 2612.0500 2422.50
Subordinate Court Key Accounts Sales 3322.0601
Manager
Judge, Supreme 2612.0100 2422.10
Court Khas Thatti Maker 7317.1200 7424.55
Judges and 2612.9900 2422.90 Khatedar, Salt 9329.0100 9322.50
Magistrates, Other Production
Juggler 2659.1000 3474.55 Kierman 8154.0200 8264.50
(Textile)/Package
Juice Clarification 3122.7000 7418.20 Dyeing Machine
Supervisor Operator
Juice Heater 8160.4800 8276.77 Kiln Loader, Brick 8181.1800 8131.77
Helper and Tile
Juice Heater Man 8160.4700 8276.76 Kiln Loader, 8181.1600 8131.72
Pottery and
Juice Measuring 8160.4500 8276.74
Porcelain
Man
Kiln Man, Brick 8181.1700 8131.75
Junior Data 2521.0202
and Tile
Associate
Kiln Man, Pottery 8181.1500 8131.70
Junior Functioner 7419.0200 7249.20
and Porcelain
(Telephone
Equipment Kiln Operator, 7521.0100 7421.10
Manufacturing) Wood
Junior Rubber 4322.0201 Kitchen Helper 9412.0100 9132.20
Technician/Techni
cal Assistant Kitchen 5120.0500 5122.50
Porter/Steward
Junior Software 2512.0205
Developer Kitting and 4321.0604
Labelling Executive
Jute Technologist 2141.1200 2149.25
VOLUME I 299
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Kneader Operator 8141.0716 Laboratory 3111.0300 3111.30
Assistant,
Knife Dresser, 7542.0600 7119.50 Chemical
Mica
Laboratory 3116.0300 3116.30
Knitter, Hand 7318.6600 7432.74 Assistant,
Chemical
Knitter, 8152.0900 8262.45
Engineering
Machine/Knitting
General
Machine Operator
Laboratory 2240.0100 3221.10
Knitting Jobber 8152.0300 8262.10
Assistant, Clinical
Knitting Machine 7318.0400 7332.40
Laboratory 3119.0100 3119.10
Operator,
Assistant,
Automatic
Engineering
Knotter, Silk 7318.4900 7432.40
Laboratory 3116.0200 3116.20
Assistant, Food &
Lab Chemist – 2113.0623
Beverages/
Compound Testing
Chemist/
– Batch Release
Analytical
Supervisor/Lab
Lab Chemist – 2113.0624
Chemist
Cured Compound
Testing
Laboratory 3111.0500 3111.40
Assistant,
Lab Chemist – 2113.0621
Geological
Finished Product
Testing
Laboratory 3116.0100 3116.10
Assistant, Glass
Lab Chemist – 2113.0622
and Ceramics
Incoming Raw
Material Testing
Laboratory 3117.0300 3117.30
Assistant,
Labeller 9321.0201 9322.20
Metallurgical
Laboratory 3141.0200 3211.20
Assistant,
Botanical
VOLUME I 300
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Laboratory 3116.0500 3116.50 Lace Maker 8152.1400 8262.70
Assistant, (Machine)
Petroleum and
Lubricants Lacer, Hand 7318.5100 7432.45
Lady Health 3222.0300 3232.30
Laboratory 3213.0200 3228.20 Visitor/ASHA
Assistant, Worker/Anganwa
Pharmaceutical di Worker
Laboratory 3111.0100 3111.10 Laminating Press 8142.0200 8232.15
Assistant, Physical Operator (Plastic)
Laboratory 3111.0200 3111.20 Lamp Repairman, 7233.1900 7233.55
Assistant, Soil Mines
Laboratory 3141.0100 3211.10 Lamp Shade 7317.0100 7331.10
Assistant, Maker
Zoological
Language 2643.0100 2444.10
Laboratory 8131.8700 8229.10 Specialist
Attendant
Language Teacher, 2341.0200 3311.20
Laboratory 3240.0400 3227.40 Middle School
Technician,
Language Teacher, 2330.0400 2320.20
Artificial Breeding
Senior Secondary
Labour Welfare 2635.0100 2446.10 and Secondary
Officer School
Labourer, 9211.0200 9201.20 Language 2643.0402
Agriculture Translator – IT
Services
Labourer, Other 9312.0100 9312.10
Language 2643.0401
Labourer, 9215.0100 9202.10 Translator –
Plantation Software Products
Lac Treater 6210.2000 6142.40 Lapper 7224.0700 7224.45
VOLUME I 301
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Larry Car Driver, 8121.0300 8121.20 Layout Engineer 2144.1301
Furnace
Lead Brush Maker 8114.0600 8212.60
Lascar Stager, Ship 7115.0800 7124.50 (Abrasive Wheel)
Building
Lead Burner 7212.0600 7212.60
Lascar/OS 8350.0400 8340.25
(Ordinary Seaman) Leaf Maker, Gold 7313.0600 7313.25
and Silver
Laser Sawing 8189.0401
Machine Operator Leather Buffer, 8155.0801 8265.45
Machine/Buffing
Laser Supervisor 3122.6505 Operator
Laser Technician 3119.1100 3139.10 Leather Cutter, 7536.2000 7442.76
Hand
Laster, Hand 7536.0800 7442.32
Leather Cutter, 8156.0800 8266.23
Laster, 8156.1401 8266.32 Machine
Machine/Lasting
Operator Leather Cutters, 8159.9900 8269.90
Lasters and
Latex Foam 8141.1600 8231.76 Sewers and
Cushion Maker Related Machine
Operators, Other
Latex Worker 8141.1500 8231.74
Leather Glazer, 8155.0900 8265.50
Lathe Machinist 7223.0701
Machine/Glazing
Machine Operator
Lattice Pegger 7318.5200 7432.50
Leather Measuring 8155.1200 8265.80
Launderers, Dry 9121.9900 9133.90
Machine
Cleaners and
Man/Measuring
Pressers, Other
Machine Operator
Laundry Workers 9121.0200 9133.20
Leather 2141.2100 2149.65
(Marker, Sorter)
Technologist
Lawyers, Other 2611.9900 2421.90
Leather, Currier 7535.1300 7441.38
Layerman 7532.0903
VOLUME I 302
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
LED Light Design 2151.0403 Lens Polisher 7315.1400 7322.34
Engineer (Optical)
LED Light Design 2151.0404 Letter Box Peon 9621.0600 9151.60
Validation (Post Man)
Engineer
Levelling Machine 8122.8100 8223.81
LED Light Repair 3113.1002 Attendant (Match)
Technician
Librarian 2622.0100 2432.10
LED Luminaries 3113.1001
Testing and Librarian (Film) 2622.0200 2432.20
Measurement
Librarians and 2622.9900 2432.90
Ledger Clerk 4311.0300 4121.40 Related
Information
Legal and Related 3411.9900 3432.90 Professionals,
Associate Other
Professionals,
Other Library Clerk 4411.0100 4141.10
Legal Assistant 3411.0100 3432.10 Library Clerks, 4411.9900 4141.90
Other
Legal Associate 2611.1002
Life Science 3141.9900
Legal 2619.9900 2429.90 Technicians
Professionals, (Excluding
Other Medical), Other
Legal 2611.0400 2421.40 Lifeguard 3423.0501
Remembrancer
Lift Truck Operator 8344.0100 8334.10
Legislators, Other 1111.9900 1119.90
Lift Truck 8344.9900 8334.90
Lens Centerer and 7315.1500 7322.35 Operator, Other
Edger (Optical
Glass) Liftman 8343.1800 8333.70
Lens Grinder 7315.1200 7322.30 Light Keeper, Light 3521.2100 3132.84
House
VOLUME I 303
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Light Motor 8322.0501 Liquor Taster 7515.0200 7415.20
Vehicle Driver
Lithographic Artist 7321.0800 7343.10
Lighting Artist 2654.0901
Lithographic 3118.0700 3118.70
Lime Juice Tank 8160.4600 8276.75 Designer
Attendant
Live Action 2654.0351
Lime Pitman, 7535.0300 7441.18 Director
Leather
Livestock Worker, 6121.0300 6121.20
Line 2153.0400 2144.40 General
Communication
Engineer, Tele- Livestock 6121.0500 6121.30
Communication/T Workers/Other
elecommunication Livestock Workers
Engineer/Technici
Load Dispatcher 3131.1100 8161.80
an
Loader and 9333.0100 9333.10
Line Inspector, 3522.0200 3114.30
Unloader
Telephone
Loader, Transport 9333.0202
Line Supervisor, 3122.6000 7248.50
Associate/Loader/
Electrical
Unloader
Lineman, Light and 7413.0100 7245.10
Loader/Loading 9333.0101
Power
and Unloading
Lineman, 7422.0400 7244.40 Operator
Telephone and
Loan Approval 3312.0101
Telegraph
Officer
Linen Keeper 5151.0500 5121.50
Locksmith 7222.0700 7222.70
Lino Operator 7322.0200 7341.35
Loco Cleaner 7233.2500 7233.65
Linoleum Maker 8132.1000 8224.40
Loco Driver, Mines 8311.0100 8311.10
Liquor Maker, 8171.0600 8142.35
Loco Foreman 3115.1400 3115.60
Paper Pulp
VOLUME I 304
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Locomotive Driver 8311.0601 Machineman, 7322.1800 8251.20
Hand Printing
Loftsman, Ship 7115.0600 7124.40
Building Machineman, 7322.2100 8251.45
Offset Printing
Log Driver 6210.1600 6141.85
Machineman, 3139.0400 8143.25
Log Feller 6210.1000 6141.55 Paper, Dry End
Looper, Metal 8121.5200 8124.15 Machineman, 3139.0300 8143.15
Drawing Paper, Wet End
Looperman, 8152.1000 8262.50 Machineman, 7322.2000 8251.40
Hosiery Rotary Printing
M.B. Tester 8131.7500 8159.72 Machineman, 8181.0200 8131.15
Sheet Glass
Machine Feeder 7213.0600 7213.60
and Off-Bearer Machinery 7233.9900 7233.90
Mechanics and
Machine 3113.0401
Fitters, Other
Maintenance
Technician Machining 9321.1401
Assistant or Helper
Machine 8171.1200 8143.10
Operator, Paper Machining 7223.5001
Technician/CNC
Machine Shop 7223.0501
Operator
Master
Technician/Setter Machinist 7233.0102
Machine Shop 7223.0502 Magician 2659.0900 3474.50
Supervisor
Magistrate 2612.0600 2422.60
Machineman, 7322.1900 8251.30
Automatic Printing Magistrate, 2612.0700 2422.65
Juvenile Court
Machineman, 7322.2200 8251.50
Direct Lithographic Magmaman 8160.4100 8276.70
Printing
Mahout 9332.0300 9332.30
VOLUME I 305
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Mail Carrier 9621.0700 9151.65 Maintenance 3113.0102
Technician
Mail Carriers and 4412.9900 4142.90 Electrical
Sorting Clerks,
Other
Maize Cultivator 6111.0301
Mail Guard 4412.0100 4142.40
Maker (Pottery 7314.0500 7321.30
Main Header 8111.1100 7111.40
and
Colliery
Porcelain)/Jigger
and Jolly Operator
Maintenance 7412.0801
Assistant/Helper
Maker-Up, Photo 7322.0600 7341.55
Type Setting
Maintenance 3113.0501
Executive
Make-Up Man 5142.0400 5141.50
Maintenance 7233.0101
Malariologist, 2212.1800 2212.45
Fitter –
Medical
Mechanical
Malt Maker 8160.6900 8278.12
Maintenance 7422.0200 7244.20
Mechanic
Malt Vinegar 8160.7300 8278.20
Maker
Maintenance 3113.0601
Technician
Man Duck 6224.1300 6159.55
Maintenance 3115.0102
Management 2431.0504
Technician –
Trainee – Product
Mechanical
Marketing
Maintenance 7231.0101
Management 2431.0502
Technician –
Trainee – Sales &
Service Workshop
Marketing/Busines
s Development
Maintenance 3115.0103
Technician
Manager – 1213.0102
Assistant –
Customer Quality
Mechanical
Manager – 2144.0106
VOLUME I 306
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Product Lifecycle Service
Management
Manager, 1213.0200 1239.20
Manager Heat 2146.0501 Automotive
Treatment/Metall Service Station
urgist
Manager, Bank 1346.0100 1227.10
Manager 3115.0501
Maintenance Manager, 1330.0100 1226.40
Mechanical & Communication
Electrical
Manager, 1323.0100 1223.10
Construction/Man
Manager Material 1223.0102 ager Construction
Testing Projects
Manager Stores 4321.0401 Manager, Dairy 1311.1400 1221.50
Operation Farm
Manager Supplier 1324.0101 Manager, 1321.0100 1222.40
Quality Electricity
Manager Testing 1223.0101 Manager, Export 1420.0300 1224.30
Facility
Manager, 1222.0200 1234.20
Manager Vendor 1324.0103 Fashion/Fashion
Development Manager
Manager, 1222.0100 1234.10 Manager, Fast 1412.0100 1225.20
Advertising and Food Service
Promotion
Manager, Flight 1324.0800 1226.30
Manager, Aerial 1311.1000 1221.24 Operation
Planting and
Manager, Food 1321.0500 1222.65
Cultivation
Processing Plant
Manager, 1311.0700 1221.10
Manager, Gas 1321.0300 1222.50
Agricultural Farm
Manager, Health 1219.0200 1228.10
Manager, 1213.0100 1239.10
Club/Manager,
Automotive
VOLUME I 307
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Fitness
Manager, Process 2144.0105
Club/Centre/Gym
Engineering
Manager, 1311.1200 1221.30
Manager, Quarry 1322.0200 1222.20
Horticulture Farm
Manager, 2654.0500 1229.10
Manager, Import 1219.0100 1227.30
Recreation and
and Export
Entertainment
Manager, 1346.0200 1227.20
Manager, Retail 1420.0200 1224.20
Insurance
Trade
Manager, Land 1323.0200 1223.20
Manager, Storage 1324.1200 1226.50
Survey
and Warehousing
Manager, 1311.1300 1221.40
Manager, Traffic 1324.0500 1226.20
Livestock Farm
Manager, 1324.0200 1226.10
Manager, Lodging 1411.0100 1225.10
Transport
and Catering
Services/Resident
Manager, Water 1321.0400 1222.60
Manager
Supply
Manager, 1321.0600 1222.70
Manager, Well 1322.0300 1222.30
Manufacturing
Drilling
Manager, Material 1324.0100 1235.10
Manager, 1420.0100 1224.10
Control/Manager
Wholesale Trade
Materials
Managers, Other 1213.9900 1239.90
Manager, Mine 1322.0100 1222.10
Services
Manager, Nursery 1311.0900 1221.22
Managing 1120.9900 1211.90
Directors and
Manager, Orchard 1311.1100 1221.26
Chief Executives,
Others
Manager, 1311.0800 1221.20
Plantation
Mango Grower 6111.1001
Manager, Poultry 1311.1500 1221.60
Manicurist 5142.0200 5141.40
Farm
VOLUME I 308
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Manpower 2424.0100 2412.10 Market Research 2431.0503
Officer/Area Associate –
Manager, Human Product Marketing
Resource
Market Research 2431.0501
Manual Blocker 7313.1305 Associate – Sales
&
Manual Bruter 7313.1301 Marketing/Busines
s Development
Manual Insertion 8212.1601
Operation Marketing and 3322.1702
Social Media
Manual Soldering 8212.1807 Manager
Technician
Marketing 3322.1701
Manual Training 2356.0100 3340.10 Manager – Line of
Teacher/Craft Business
Instructor
Masher 8160.7000 8278.14
Manufacturing 1321.9900 1302.90
Managers, Other Masking Machine 8212.1805
Operator
Manufacturing 3122.9900
Supervisors, Other Masseur 2264.0400 3226.40
Map and Chart 7323.0200 7345.20 Master Auto 3115.0601
Mounter Service
Technician/Auto
Marine Biologist 2131.0200 2211.15 Service Technician
Marker, Log 6210.1200 6141.65 Master Cutter 7532.0600 7435.30
(Garment)
Marker, Metal 7222.0100 7222.10
Master Official 2619.0400 2429.30
Marker/Groundsm 3422.0500 3475.70
Referee and
en & Women
Registrar in Equity
and Commissioner
Market Research 2431.0100 2419.40
for Taking
Analyst
Accounts (High
Court)
VOLUME I 309
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Engine, Field 7232.70
Master Trainer for 2356.0301
Service/Filed
Junior Software
Mechanic Aircraft
Developer
Mechanic Aircraft, 7232.0600 7232.60
Masticator, 8131.6000 8159.36
Engine
Rubber
Overhauling
Mat Shearing 8152.0500 8262.25
Mechanic Aircraft, 7232.0200 7232.20
Operator
Propeller
Mat Weaver, 7317.0800 7424.35
Mechanic Fitter 7231.0401
Bamboo
Mechanic 7311.0100 7311.10
Precision
Mat Weaver, 7317.0900 7424.40
Instrument,
Grass and Leave
General
Material Co- 1324.0102
Mechanic 7311.0400 7311.30
Ordination
Precision
Manager
Instrument,
Material Scientist 2111.1100 2119.20 Mechanical
Mathematician 2120.0100 2121.10 Mechanic, 7311.0600 7311.40
Atomizer and Fuel
Mathematicians, 2120.9900 2122.90 Pump (Diesel)
Actuaries and
Statisticians, Other Mechanic, 7231.0100 7231.10
Automobile
Matron, 5151.0400 5121.35
Housekeeping Mechanic, Dairy 7233.1400 7233.42
Maintenance
Mattress Maker 7534.0500 7437.45
(Spring) Mechanic, Dental 3214.0100 7311.80
Mazdoor/Helper 9311.0101 Mechanic, Diesel 7233.0400 7233.24
Engine
Measurement 7543.0301
Checker Mechanic, Earth 7233.0700 7233.28
Moving Machinery
Mechanic Aircraft 7232.0500 7232.50;
VOLUME I 310
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Mechanic, 7233.0600 7233.26 Mechanic, Road 7233.0800 7233.30
Gas/Diesel Engine Roller
Mechanic, 7233.1100 7233.36 Mechanic, Sewing 7233.1800 7233.52
Maintenance, Machine
Chemical
Plant/Technician, Mechanic, 7233.1000 7233.34
Maintenance, Stationery Steam
Chemical Plant Engine
Mechanic, Mining 7233.1500 7233.44 Mechanic, Textile 7233.1600 7233.46
Machinery Machinery
Mechanic, Motor 7231.0500 7231.50 Mechanic, Turbine 7233.0900 7233.32
Cycle
Mechanical 8212.1501
Mechanic, Optical 7311.0800 7311.60 Assembly
Instrument Operator
Mechanic, Petrol 7233.0300 7233.22 Mechanical 2144.0900 2145.45
Engine Engineer,
Aeronautical
Mechanic, 7412.0100 7241.10
Precision Mechanical 2144.1200 2145.60
Instrument, Engineer, Air-
Electrical Conditioning
Mechanic, Printing 7233.1700 7233.48 Mechanical 2144.0700 2145.40
Machinery Engineer,
Automobile
Mechanic, Pump 7233.1300 7233.40
Mechanical 2144.0100 2145.10
Mechanic, 7127.0100 7233.50 Engineer, General
Refrigeration and
Air-Conditioning Mechanical 2144.0600 2145.35
Engineer,
Mechanic, 7233.2000 7233.58 Maintenance
Repairman
(Domestic Mechanical 2144.1000 2145.50
Appliances) Engineer, Marine
VOLUME I 311
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Mechanical 2144.0401 2145.25 Medical and 3214.9900
Engineer, Dental Prosthetic
Production Technicians, Other
Mechanical 2144.0500 2145.30 Medical and 2269.0700 3229.90
Engineer, Health
Structural Technicians, Other
Mechanical 3115.0101 3115.10 Medical 3256.9900 3221.90
Engineering Assistants, Other
Technician/Superv
isor R&D Testing Medical 3211.0501
Equipment
Mechanical 3115.9900 3115.90 Technician
Engineering
Technicians, Other Medical Imaging 3211.9900 3133.90
and Therapeutic
Mechanical 2144.9900 2145.90 Equipment
Engineers, Other Technicians, Other
Mechanical Fitter 7412.0202 Medical 3212.0701
Laboratory
Mechanical Fitter 7412.1001 Technician
– Control Panel
Medical Records 3252.0101
Mechanical Sub- 8211.0101 and Health
Assembly Information
Technician Technician
Mechanist, 7223.0500 8211.10 Medical 2433.0201 3415.20
General/Machinist Representative
Media Developer 2513.0302 Medical Social 2635.0400 2446.40
– Application Worker
Development
Medical 3512.0700 3121.40
Media Developer 2513.0301 Transcriptionist
– Product
Development and Melter 8121.3100 8122.52
Delivery Reveraberatory –
VOLUME I 312
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Furnace,
Metal Moulders 7211.9900 7211.90
Pulverised Coal
and Core Makers,
Fired/Reverberato
Other
ry Furnace
Operator
Metal Processing 8121.9900 8124.70
Plant Operators,
Member, 2612.0900 2422.72
Other
Administrative
Tribunal
Metal Production 3135.9900 8121.90
Process
Member, 2612.1300 2422.87
Controllers, Other
Consumer
Redressal Forum
Metal Setter 7313.0802
Member, 2612.1100 2422.80
Metal 7221.0800 7221.80
Industrial Tribunal
Spinner/Metal
spinning Machine
Merchandiser – 3323.0102
Operator
Apparel
Metal Sprayer 7132.0300 7142.25
Merchandiser – 3323.0101
Gem & Jewellery
Metal Sprayer 8122.5500 8223.55
Merry-Go-Round 3435.0400 3474.80
Metal Stamper 7223.3000 8211.80
Operator
Metal Wheel 7224.9900 7224.90
Messengers, 9621.9900 9151.90
Grinder, Polishing
Package Deliverers
and Tool
and Luggage
Sharpeners, Other
Porters, Other
Metal Working 7223.9900 8211.90
Metal Bluer 7224.1100 7224.80
Machine Tool
Setters and
Metal Drawing 8121.5800 8124.90
Operators, Others
Operatives
Metallurgist, 2146.0500 2147.40
Metal Finishing, 8122.9900 8223.90
Extractive
Plating and
Coating Machine
Metallurgists, 2146.0600 2147.50
Operators, Other
Adaptive
VOLUME I 313
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Other
Meteorologist 2112.0100 2112.10
Midwifery 3222.0200 3232.20
Meteorologists, 2112.9900 2112.90
Attendant
Other
Milker 6121.0700 6121.40
Meter Reader 9623.0300 9153.20
Milker, Machine 6121.0800 6121.45
Meter Sealer, 7411.0500 7137.35
Electrical
Milkman 5212.0100 9111.10
Method Study 3115.0401
Miller 8154.1900 8264.79
Executive
Miller, Food 8160.0700 8273.10
Methods Engineer 2141.0600 2149.80
Grains
Methods, Time 3119.0700 3119.50
Miller/Mill 8131.0200 8151.20
and Motion Study
Operator
Technician
(Chemical)
Metrologist 2111.1000 2119.10
Miller/Operator – 7223.1201 8211.30
Conventional
Micro Irrigation 3142.0101
Milling
Technician
Millwright 7233.1200 7233.38
Microstat 7321.1300 7343.35
Cameraman
Mimic 2659.0800 3474.45
Microwave 2153.0300 2144.30
Mine Cutting and 8111.1400 7111.49
Engineer,
Channelling
Telecommunicatio
Machine Operator
n
Miner, Coal 8111.0800 7111.25
Middle School 2341.0100 3311.10
Teacher
Miner, Coal 8111.0100 8111.10
Cutting Machine
Midwife 3222.0100 3232.10
Miner, Metal 8111.0600 7111.15
Midwifery 3222.9900 3232.90
Associate
Miner, Mica 8111.0700 7111.20
Professionals,
VOLUME I 314
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Mineral and Stone 8112.9900 8112.90 Mining Managers, 1322.9900 1222.90
Processing Plant Other
Operators, Other
Mirror Silverer 7316.1100 7324.60
Mineralogist 2114.0600 2114.60
Mixed Animal 6129.0200 6124
Mines, Quarrymen 8111.9900 7111.90 Producers
and Related
Workers, Other Mixed Crop and 6130.9900 6130.90
Animal Workers,
Mines, 9311.0100 9311.10 Other
Quarrymen,
Related Workers Mixed Crop 6114.9900 6114.90
Growers, Other
Mining and 3117.9900 3117.90
Metallurgical Mixer, 8131.6200 8159.40
Technicians, Other Rubber/Mill
Operator
Mining and 9311.9900 9311.90
Quarrying Mixerman 3135.0500 8121.30
Labourers, Other
Mixing Machine 7512.0200 7412.15
Mining Engineer, 2146.0100 2147.10 Attendant
General
Mixing Machine 8181.2300 8139.20
Mining Engineer, 2146.0300 2147.25 Operator
Metal (Abrasive)
Mining Engineer, 2146.0200 2147.20 Mixing 8131.0400 8151.40
Non-Metals Machineman
Attendant
Mining Engineer, 2146.0400 2147.30 (Chemical)
Petroleum and
Gas Mixing Tank 8160.0400 8272.20
Operator
Mining Engineers, 2146.9900 2147.90
Metallurgists and Mobile Crane 8343.0500 8333.18
Related Operator
Professionals,
Mobile Equipment 7233.0701
Other
VOLUME I 315
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Maintenance
Motorcycle 8321.9900 8321.90
Drivers, Other
Mobile Equipment 8342.2101
Operator
Mould Maker, 7314.0100 7321.10
Pottery and
Model 5241.0200 5210.20
Porcelain
Model, Fashion 5241.0100 5210.10
Mould Setter 8142.1300 8232.65
(Plastic)
Modeller 2144.0802
Moulder 8141.1201 8231.67
Modeller 2166.0202
(Rubber)/Compres
Modeller (Except 2651.0200 2452.20 sion Moulding
Stone) Operator
Modeller, Pottery 8181.1100 8131.40 Moulder, General 7211.0100 7211.10
and Porcelain
Moulder, Hand 7314.0400 7321.25
Module Assembly 8212.2302 (Ceramics)
Technician
Moulder, Hand 8142.1400 8232.70
Module Soldering 8212.2301 (Plastic)
Operator
Moulder, Machine 7211.0200 7211.20
Moneylender 4213.0100 4214.10
Moulder, Rubber 8141.2200 8231.86
Monitor, 3341.0500 4142.25 Tube
Telephone
Moulder, Vertical 7211.0300 7211.30
Mono Caster 7322.0400 7341.45 Pipe
Mono Operator 7322.0300 7341.40 Moulder, Wood 7523.0900 7423.45
Mortiser Operator 7523.1000 7423.50 Moulding 8142.0502
Operator
Mosaic Layer 7122.0500 7132.50
Mouldman (Glass) 7315.0600 7322.20
Motor Vehicle 7231.9900 7231.90
Mechanics, Other Mounter/Mountin 7321.1000 7343.20
g Machine
Operator/CNC
VOLUME I 316
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Mounting Other
Machine Operator
Mutual Fund 3311.0202
Movie 3521.0200 3131.15 Agent
Cameraman
Mycologist 2131.0700 2211.50
Mud Supervisor 3121.0600 8118.35
Nailer, 8156.0600 8266.20
Mudman 8113.0300 8113.20 Machine/Machine
Operator, Nailing
Mukadam, Salt 9329.0200 9322.55
Production Nailor, Fur 7531.1600 7434.50
Multimedia Artist 2166.0201 2452.70 Nattuvan 2653.0200 2454.20
and
Animator/Animato Naturopath 2269.0100 2229.20
r
Navigator, Aircraft 3153.0800 3143.70
Municipal Water 9623.0301
Neera Technician 6112.0201
and Sewage
Assessor
Net Maker 6224.1400 6159.60
Munsif 2612.0400 2422.40
Net Maker, Hand 7318.6400 7432.70
Music Composer 2652.0100 2453.10
Network 3114.1301
Management
Musical 7312.0100 7312.10
Engineer
Instrument Maker
(String )
Neurologist 2212.0100 2221.35
Musical 7312.9900 7312.90
News Librarian 2622.0500 2432.40
Instrument
Makers and
News Reporter 2642.0100 2451.30
Tuners, Other
Newspaper Boy 5243.0100 9113.10
Musical 7312.1800 7312.65
Instrument
Noodle Press 8160.2000 8274.60
Repairer
Operator
Musicians, Singers 2652.9900 2453.90
Nuclear Engineer 2141.1100 2149.23
and Composers,
VOLUME I 317
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Nuclear Plant 3131.0800 8161.65 Office Assistant 3341.1000 3431.30
Control Operator
Office Boy/Peon 4419.0500 4190.80
Numismatist 2633.0400 2443.40
Office Supervisors, 3341.9900 3439.90
Nurse, General 3221.0100 3231.10 Other
Nurse, Industrial 3221.0200 3231.20 Official Assignee 2619.0700 2429.50
(High Court)
Nurse, Specialist 2221.0100 2230.10
Oil Crusher 7514.0200 7414.20
Nursery Workers 6113.9900 6113.90 Operator, Animal-
and Gardeners, Driven
Other
Oil Crusher 8160.1200 8273.60
Nurseryman 6113.0200 6113.20 Operator, Power
Nursing Associate 3221.9900 3231.90 Oil Expeller Man 7514.0100 7414.10
Professionals,
Other Oil Technologist 2145.1000 2146.62
Nursing Attendant 3221.0300 3231.30 Oiler and Greaser, 3131.0700 8161.60
Stationary Engine
Nutritionist, 2265.0100 3223.10 and Machinery
General
Operation 2120.0500 2122.30
Oarsman 8350.0800 8340.60 Research Analyst
Obstetrician 2212.1100 2221.75 Operation Theatre 3212.0101 3211.40
Technician
Occupational 2423.0500 2412.75
Analyst Operator – 7224.0402
Conventional
Occupational 2141.2600 2149.86
Surface Grinding
Health and Safety
Machines
Specialist
Operator, Call 5244.0100 5220.22
Occupational 2264.0200 3226.20
Centre
Therapist
Operator, Farm 8341.0200 8331.20
Oceanographer 2114.0800 2114.80
VOLUME I 318
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Machines
Optical Worker 7315.1100 7322.29
Operator, Hot 3135.1900 8122.28
Optician, Contact 3254.0200 3224.20
Rolling Mill (Non-
Lens
Ferrous
Metal)/Mill
Optician, General 3254.0100 3224.10
Operator
Optometrists and 2267.9900 3224.90
Operator, 7419.0600 7249.60
Opticians, Other
Impregnation
Plant (Telephone Oral and 2261.0200 2225.20
Equipment Maxillofacial
Manufacturing) Surgeon
Operator, Rack 8212.1200 8283.60 Orchestra 2652.0200 2453.20
Wiring (Telephone Conductor
& Telegraph
Equipment Ordained Religious 2636.9900 2462.90
Manufacturing) and Non-Ordained
Religious Workers
Operator, Strip 3135.2300 8122.42
Mill (Non-Ferrous Order Processor 5223.0101
Metal)
Order 5243.0200 9113.20
Ophthalmologist 2212.0800 2221.65 Supplier/Supplier
Optical and 3119.9900 3139.90 Organ Tuner 7312.1000 7312.35
Electronic
Equipment Orientation & 2269.0600 3229.50
Controllers, Other Mobility Instructor
Optical Examiner, 8131.7600 8159.74 Orthodontist 2261.0300 2225.30
Ampoules
Orthopaedic 7311.1200 7311.75
Optical Fibre 7422.0802 Appliances and
Splicer Limb Technician
Optical Fibre 7422.0801 Orthopaedist 2212.1400 2221.85
Technician
Orthotist and 2269.0500 3229.40
Prosthetist
VOLUME I 319
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Operator
Other Artistic and 3435.9900 3474.90
Cultural Associate
Paddy Farmer 6111.0101
Professionals,
Other
Paediatric Dentist 2261.0600 2225.60
Other Sales 3322.1400 3415.80
Paediatrician 2212.1300 2221.80
Supervisor
Painter, Brush 7132.0500 7142.40
Ovenman (Bakery 7512.0300 7412.20
Products) Painter, Building 7131.0100 7141.10
Overhead Crane 8343.0700 8333.22 Painter, Fine Art 2651.0400 2452.40
Operator
Painter, General 7132.0100 7142.10
Overman, Colliery 3121.0400 8118.25
Painter, Glass 7132.0700 7142.60
Overseer, Civil 3112.0100 3112.10
Engineering Painter, Industrial 7131.0300 7141.25
Overseer, 3341.0200 4142.10 Painter, Mate 7132.0900 7142.80
Postmen
Painter, Sign and 7132.0400 7142.30
Pack Animal Driver 9332.0400 9332.40 Letter
Package 2163.0100 3471.80 Painter, 7132.0201 7142.20
Designer/Packagin Spray/Painting
g Designer Technician (Spray
Painting)
Packager and 9321.0102
Despatcher Painter, Steel 7131.0200 7141.20
Structure
Packaging 2141.0400 2149.77
Engineer Painter, Wood 7132.0600 7142.50
Work and
Packer, Hand 9321.0101 9322.10 Furniture
Packer, Rock 8111.1800 7111.65 Painters and 7131.9900 7141.90
Related Workers,
Padding 8154.2300 8264.83
Other
Machineman/Pad
ding Mangle
VOLUME I 320
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Fixer/Decorator
Painting and 3123.0600
Surface Treatment
Paper Product 8143.9900 8253.90
Line In-Charge
Makers, Other
Painting 3123.0700
Papier Mache 8143.0500 8253.50
Supervisor
Moulder
Palaeontologist 2114.0300 2114.30
Paraffin Plant 3134.0600 8155.60
Operator (Petrol
Paleobotanist 2133.0400 2211.45
Refining)
Palmist 5161.0200 5152.10
Paramedical 2240.9900
Practitioners,
Panchayat 4120.0300 4115.30
Other
Secretary
Parasitologist 2131.1100 2211.70
Panman 7512.0600 7412.35
(Confectionery)
Parcher (Food 7514.0500 7414.36
Grain)
Panman (Food 8160.2800 8275.55
Canning and
Parquetry Floor 7122.0600 7132.60
Preserving)
Layer
Panman, Sugar 8160.3800 8276.50
Parts Picker 9329.0801
Pantograph 8189.0701 7313.72
Passenger Guide, 5112.0800 5112.50
Machine Operator
Railway
Pantry Man 5120.0600 5122.60
Paste Maker 8131.1800 8152.50
Paper Board 7522.2100 7422.65
Pasteuriser, 8160.7500 8278.30
Maker
Brewery
Paper Board, 8219.9900 8286.90
Pasteurising Plant 8160.0300 8272.10
Textile and
Operator (Dairy)
Related Products
Assemblers, Other
Pathologist, 2212.1700 2212.40
Medical
Paper 7131.0500 7141.40
Hanger/Wallpaper
Patrol, Irrigation 4419.0300 4190.50
VOLUME I 321
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Patroller, Women 3353.0200 3443.20 Pelt Dresser, 7535.1700 7441.46
General
Pattern Maker 7536.0400 7442.16
(Footwear) Pelt Dressers, 7535.9900 7441.90
Tanners and Fell
Pattern Maker, Fur 7531.1300 7434.20 Mongers, Other
Pattern Marker, 7222.0800 7222.80 Pelt Dyer, Hand 7535.2100 7441.55
Metal Foundry
Pelt Flesher 7535.1900 7441.50
Pattern Marker, 7522.1000 7422.38
Wood Pelt Grader 7535.1800 7441.48
Patwari 4419.0200 4190.40 Pelt Plucker and 7535.2000 7441.52
Trimmer
Paviour 7112.0400 7122.40
Pelt, Stitcher 7535.2200 7441.60
Pawn Broker 4213.0200 4214.20
Pencil Maker 8131.8900 8229.30
Pawnbrokers and 4213.9900 4214.90
Moneylenders, Penologist 2632.0600 2442.50
Other
Performance 7543.0802
PCB Assembly 8212.2701 Tester
Operator
Performance 7543.1005
Peanut Blancher 8160.3100 8275.70 Tester – RACW
Pedicurist and 5142.0201 Performance 7543.1006
Manicurist Tester – TV
Peeling Machine 8160.6100 8277.30 Periodontist 2261.0400 2225.40
Attendant (Coffee)
Permanent Way 3112.0200 3112.20
Peeling Machine 8172.0800 8141.60 Inspector
Operator
Person Handling 7542.0101
Peeling Machine 8160.2200 8275.10 Explosives
Operator (Food
Canning and Personal and 2423.9900 2412.90
Preserving) Careers
VOLUME I 322
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Professionals,
Pharmacy 3213.0101
Other
Assistant
Personal Secretary 4120.0200 4115.20
Philatelist 2633.0500 2443.50
Personal Security 5414.0171
Philologists, 2643.9900 2444.90
Officer
Translators and
Interpreters,
Personnel and 1212.9900 1232.90
Other
Industrial
Relations
Philosophers, 2633.9900 2443.90
Managers, Other
Historians and
Political Scientists,
Personnel 1212.0100 1232.10
Other
Manager
Phlebotomy 3212.0601
Petition Writer 3411.0300 3432.30
Technician
Petrol Pump 5245.0101 5220.45
Photo Type Setting 7322.0700 7341.60
Salesman/Fuel
Machine Operator
Serviceman/Fuel
Dispensing
Photographer 3431.0200 3131.30
Attendant
News
Petroleum and 3117.0200 3117.20
Photographer, 3431.0300 3131.35
Natural Gas
Aerial
Extraction
Technician
Photographer, 3431.0100 3131.25
General
Petroleum 3134.9900 8155.90
Refining Workers,
Photographers, 3431.9900 3131.90
Other
Other
Petrologists 2114.0200 2114.20
Photographic Dark 8132.0600 7344.50
Room Operatives
Pharmaceutical 3213.9900 3228.90
Assistants, Other
Photographic Film 8132.0900 8224.30
and Papermaker
Pharmacist 3213.0100 3228.10
Photographic 8132.9900 8224.90
Pharmacologist 2212.1500 2212.30
Products Machine
VOLUME I 323
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Operators, Other
Physicist, 2111.0600 2111.35
Electricity and
Photostat Camera 7321.1400 7343.40
Magnetism
Operator/Photoco
pier Operator
Physicist, 2111.0700 2111.40
Electronics
Physical Design 3118.0302
Engineer
Physicist, General 2111.0100 2111.10
Physical Science 3111.9900 3111.90
Physicist, Heat 2111.0300 2111.20
Technicians, Other
Physicist, Light 2111.0400 2111.25
Physical Security 2320.0102
Trainer
Physicist, 2111.0200 2111.15
Mechanics
Physical Training 3423.0200 3475.15
Instructor/Physical
Physicist, Nuclear 2111.0800 2111.50
Education Teacher
Physicist, Sound 2111.0500 2111.30
Physician, 2230.0100 2222.10
Ayurvedic Physicists and 2111.9900 2111.90
Astronomers,
Physician, Bio- 2230.0300 2223.20
Other
Chemic/Bio
Chemist Physiologist, 2212.1900 2212.50
Medical
Physician, General 2211.0100 2221.10
Physiotherapist 2264.0100 3226.10
Physician, 2230.0200 2223.10
Homeopathic Physiotherapists 2264.9900 3226.90
and Related
Physician, 2269.0200 2229.30
Associate
Osteopathic
Professionals,
Other
Physician, Sidha 2269.0300 2229.40
Piano Tuner 7312.1200 7312.43
Physician, Unani 2230.0400 2224.10
Pick and Place 8212.1603
Physicians and 2269.0400 2229.90
Assembly
Surgeons, Other
Operator
VOLUME I 324
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Pick Miners 8111.0500 7111.10 Pith Worker, 7522.1500 7422.50
Wood
Picker 8122.6700 8223.67
Pitting Machine 8160.2300 8275.20
Picker (Tobacco) 9211.0300 9201.30 Operator (Food
Canning and
Pickler (Can & 7514.1000 7414.54
Preserving)
Preservation)
Plain Tabler 3112.0300 3112.30
Pickler (Meat 7511.0500 7411.45
Product) Planer 7223.0900 8211.24
Picture Frame 7522.1600 7422.52 Planer (Mosaic 7122.0400 7132.40
Maker Tile)
Picture Framer 7125.0300 7135.30 Planer, Edge 7223.1000 8211.26
Piecer 7318.4300 7432.22 Planer, Wood 7523.0600 7423.35
Pile Driver 8342.1100 8332.30 Planner 7313.1202
Pilot Ship/Bay 3152.0600 3142.60 Planning Engineer 2141.0500 2149.78
Pilot/Harbour
Pilot/Channel Pilot Planning 3122.6503
Supervisor
Pilot, General 3153.0300 3143.30
Plant Breeder 2131.0600 2211.40
Pilot, Glider 3153.0500 3143.50
Plant Pathologist 2131.1500 2212.70
Pin Setter (Textile) 8151.1600 8261.83
Plant Physiologist 2131.1800 2212.80
Pipe Fitter 7126.0301 7136.30
Planter 6113.0100 6113.10
Pipe 7126.0201 7136.20
Layer/Plumber Plasma Cutter – 7212.0402
Pipeline Manual
Pipe Machineman, 8112.1000 8112.62 Plasterer 7123.0100 7133.10
Stoneware
Plasterers, Other 7123.9900 7133.90
Pisciculturist 2132.0900 2211.80
VOLUME I 325
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Plastic Fabricator 8142.1600 8232.80 Plumber Aftersales 3322.5002
Service
Plastic Moulding 3122.2300
Shift In-Charge Plumber, General 7126.0101 7136.10
Plastic Moulding 3122.2200 Plumber, General 7126.0103
Shop Supervisor – Installation and
Repair
Plastic Moulding 8142.1301
Technician or Plumber, General 7126.0105
Operator Assistant
Plastic Products 8142.9900 8232.90 Plumber, General 7126.0104
Making Helper
Operatives, Other
Plumber, 7126.0107
Plate Worker, 7512.0700 7412.40 Maintenance and
Confectionery Servicing
Plater 7313.0102 Plumber, 7126.0106
Maintenance and
Platform 1324.1600 1226.62 Servicing Assistant
Inspector, Railway
Plumber, 7126.0102
PLC Assembly 8212.2002 Operations
Operator
Plumbers and Pipe 7126.9900 7136.90
Ploughman 9211.0100 9201.10 Fitters, Other
Plumber (Pumps & 7233.1301 Plumbing 3118.0201
E/M Mechanic) Draftsman
Plumber (Welder) 7212.0102 Plumbing Foreman 3123.0301
Assistant
Plumbing Mason 7112.0201
Plumber 7212.0101
(Welder)/Plumbin Plumbing Products 5223.0104
g (Sanitary Sales Assistant
Fixtures) Fitter
Assistant Plumbing Products 3322.5001
VOLUME I 326
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Sales Officer
Polisher (Glass 8181.1000 8131.37
Manufacturing)
Plumbing Site 2142.0301
Engineer
Polisher and 7313.0701
Cleaner
Plumbing 3123.0302
Supervisor
Polishing Machine 8114.0100 8212.10
Operator (Mosaic)
Pneumatic 7126.0600 7136.60
Chipper
Polishing 3122.6508
Supervisor
Poet 2641.0500 2451.65
Political Scientist 2633.0600 2443.60
Points Man, 8312.0300 8312.30
Railway
Political Worker 1114.0100 1141.10
Pointsmen, 8312.9900 8312.90
Pollution Control 2143.0500 2149.88
Signalmen and
Engineer
Shunters,
Railways, Other
Porter, Baggage 9621.0500 9151.50
(Hotel &
Police Constable 5412.0100 5162.10
Restaurant)
Police Inspectors 3355.9900 3450.90
Post Master 1330.0300 1226.80
and Detectives,
Other
Post Tanning 8155.1102
Machine Operator
Police Officers, 5412.9900 5162.90
Other
Postman 4412.0200 4142.45
Police Prosecutor 2611.0700 2421.65
Potter (Pottery 7314.0900 7321.60
and
Polished Diamond 7313.1503
Porcelain)/Potter's
Grader & Assorter
Wheel Operator
(Advance)
Potting and Curing 7412.0901
Polished Diamond 7313.1502
Operator
Grader & Assorter
(Basic)
Poultry Farm 6122.0301 6122.30
Worker,
Polisher 7224.0801 7224.55
General/Broiler
VOLUME I 327
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Farm Worker Instrument
Makers and
Poultry Farm 6122.9900 6122.90 Repairers, Other
Workers, Other
Precision Printing 7322.1500 7346.50
Poultry Scientist 2132.0800 2213.80 Worker
Pounder, Hand 7514.0400 7414.35 Pre-Delivery 3322.4001
(Food Grain) Inspection In-
Charge
Pounding Machine 8156.0100 8266.10
Operator Pre-Delivery 3322.4002
(Footwear) Inspection
Supervisor
Power Hammer 7221.0300 7221.30
Operator Pre-Press 7321.9900 7343.90
Technicians,
Power Plant 3131.0500 8161.45
Others
Operator
Pre-Primary 2342.9900 3320.90
Power Press 7223.2300 8211.60
Education
Operator, Metal
Teaching Associate
Professionals,
Power Production 3131.9900
Other
Plant Operators,
Other
Preservation 4411.0300 4141.30
Assistant, Archives
Power Shovel 8342.0501 8332.18
Operator/Excavat
Preservative Filler, 7514.1100 7414.56
or Operator
Machine (Can &
Preservation)
Pre- and Post- 8141.0101
Calendering
President, 2612.1200 2422.85
Operator
Consumer
Redressal Forum
Pre-Assembly 8156.2501
Operator
President, 2612.1000 2422.75
Industrial Tribunal
Precipitator 8112.0500 8112.40
Press Operator 8159.0400 8269.40
Precision 7311.9900 7311.90
VOLUME I 328
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Press Shop 7211.0102 Pressure Die 8121.4201
Assistant/Helper Casting (PDC)
Operator
Press Shop 7211.0101
Operator Priest 2636.0100 2461.10
Press Shop Shift 3122.4601 Primary School 2341.0400 3312.10
In-Charge Teacher
Press Shop 3122.4602 Primary School 2341.9900 3312.90
Supervisor Teachers, Other
Presser, Hand 9121.0600 9133.60 Principal, College 1120.3900 1219.50
Presser, 8171.2200 8143.60 Printer 8132.0100 7344.10
Handmade Paper Photographic
Presser, 8157.0400 8264.40 Printers, Others 7322.9900 8251.90
Machine/Ironing
Operator Printing Jobber 7322.1300 7346.30
Pressing Machine 8212.1806 Printing Machine 8142.1100 8232.60
Operator Operator (Plastic)
Pressman 8157.0401 Printing Machine 8132.0700 8224.10
Operator,
Pressman 8181.0700 8131.28 Photographic
(Abrasive)
Printing Master 2141.1700 2149.50
Pressman 8181.0400 8131.22 (Textile)
(Ceramics)
Printing 2141.2400 2149.74
Pressman 7322.1700 8251.10 Technologist
(Flatbed, Letter
Press) Prison Guards, 5413.9900 5163.90
Other
Pressman (Glass) 8181.0300 8131.20
Private Secretary 4120.0100 4115.10
Pressman, Roto 7322.2300 8251.60
Gravure Probation Officer 2635.0300 2446.30
VOLUME I 329
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Engineer
Process Design 2144.0101
Engineer
Product Design 2144.0801
Manager
Process Man, 3133.0100 8152.10
Chemical
Product 3122.6502
Development
Process Operator 3135.2002
Manager
Rolling Mills
Product Executive 2431.0601
Process Server 4419.0800 5132.30
Product Graders 7543.9900
Process Try-Out 2144.0102
and Testers,
Engineer
Others
Process Try-Out 2144.0103
Product Specialist 3114.1101
Technician
Engineer
Process Validation 2144.0104
Production 2144.0403
Executive
Engineer
Processing Man 8160.2700 8275.50
Production 2654.0800 1229.50
(Food Canning and
Manager (Motion
Preserving)
Picture)
Producer Gas 8131.5800 8159.28
Production 2141.0501
Plant Operator
Planning & Control
Engineer
Producer, Film 2654.0700 1229.40
Production 3122.3551
Producer, Stage 2654.0600 1229.30
Supervisor –
Product Brand 2431.0201 Sewing
Manager
Professional 2221.9900 2230.90
(Automotive)
Nurses, Other
Product 2144.0402
Professional 3421.0100 3475.20
Conceptualization
Sportsman/Profes
Engineer
sional, Athlete
Product Design 2144.0803
Professors/Assista 2310.9900 2310.90
VOLUME I 330
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
nt Professors, Manager
Other
Pruner, Tea 6112.0100 6112.30
Profiling Machine 7223.2900 8211.75 Gardens
Operator
Psychiatrist 2211.0500 2221.30
Profiling Operator 8141.0700 8231.40
(Cycle Tyre) Psychologist 2634.0100 2445.10
Programme 2656.0100 3472.10 Psychologist, 2634.0800 2445.80
Announcer Counselling
Programmer 2512.0300 2132.30 Psychologist, 2634.0400 2445.40
Analyst Educational
Programmer, 2512.0800 2132.40 Psychologist, 2634.0300 2445.30
Engineering and Engineering
Scientific/System
Psychologist, 2634.0500 2445.50
Programmer
Social
Programming 3514.0300 3121.20
Psychologists, 2634.9900 2445.90
Assistant/Junior
Other
Software Engineer
Psychometrist 2634.0200 2445.20
Prompter 3435.0300 3474.47
Public Address 3521.1000 3132.50
Proofreader 4413.0200 4143.20
Equipment
Propagandist 2431.0800 3411.30 Operator
Property Dealer 3334.0100 3413.10 Public Health 2142.0901
System Design
Prosthodontist 2261.0500 2225.50 Engineer
Prothonotary and 2619.0100 2429.10 Public Prosecutor 2611.0600 2421.60
Senior Master
Public Relations 2432.0200 2419.20
Prototyping 2144.0701 Officer
Engineer
Public Relations 2432.9900 2419.90
Prototyping 2144.0804 Professionals,
VOLUME I 331
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Other
Puppeteer 2659.1200 3474.75
Publicity Assistant 4419.0100 4190.25
Purchase 3323.0401
Executive
Publicity Officer 2432.0100 2419.10
Purchase 3323.0501
PUC Attendant 9623.0401
Executive – Solar
Pug Mill Operator 8181.2500 8139.40
Purchasing Agent 3323.0200 3416.20
(Ceramics)
Purohit 2636.0200 2462.10
Pulp and 8171.9900 8143.90
Papermaking Plant
Purse Maker 7536.2400 7442.81
Operators, Other
Purser, Ship 1211.0300 1231.10
Pulp Houseman 8160.6000 8277.25
(Coffee)
PV System 7421.1403
Installation
Pulses Cultivator 6111.0401
Engineer
Pulveriser 8112.0200 8112.15
QC Executive – 7543.0201
Operator
Sewing Line
Pulveriser 8131.0300 8151.30
Quality Assessor 7543.0202
Operator,
Chemical
Quality Assurance 2519.0300 2139.10
Analyst
Pump Man 3134.0300 8155.30
(Computers)
(Petroleum
Refining)
Quality Assurance 2113.0901
Chemist
Pump Station 3134.0700 8155.70
Operator
Quality Assurance 2519.0301
Engineer – IT
Pump Station 3132.0600 8163.60
Services
Operator,
Waterworks
Quality Assurance 2519.0401
Engineer –
Pumpman 3132.1000 8169.40
Software Products
Puncher, Metal 7126.0500 7136.50
Quality Assurance 1213.0101
VOLUME I 332
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Standards In-
Quarryman, Other 8111.1000 7111.35
Charge
Quarryman, 8111.0900 7111.30
Quality Control 2113.0601
Stone/Quarryman,
Chemist
Non-Metal
Quality Control 3139.5001
Quick Care Point 9623.0601
Inspector
Attendant
Quality Control 7543.3001
RAC Assembly 8212.1301
Inspector –
Operator
Calendering
Race Horse Trainer 2659.1400 3474.65
Quality Control 7543.3002
Inspector –
Radar Mechanic 7422.0900 7243.20
Dimension Check
Radar Operator 3521.1700 3132.80
Quality Control 7543.3003
Inspector – Radial Driller 7223.1600 8211.38
Extrusion
Radiation 2143.0300 2149.22
Quality Control 7543.3004 Protection
Inspector – Engineer
Statistical Process
Control Radio 2642.0500 2451.55
Commentator
Quality Control 7543.3005
Inspector – Visual Radio Craftsman, 7422.1600 7243.75
Inspection Installation
Quality Controller 3139.5002 Radio Craftsman, 7422.1700 7243.80
Maintenance
Quality Engineer 2152.0601
Radio Engineer, 2153.0200 2144.20
Quality Engineer 2519.0501 Telecommunicatio
n
Quality Inspector – 7543.2001
Forged, Casted or Radio Mechanic 7422.1500 7243.70
Machined
Components Radio Operator, 3521.1500 3132.75
Aircraft
VOLUME I 333
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Operator
Radio Operator, 3521.0800 3132.30
Broadcasting
Rearer, Silkworm/ 6123.0201 6123.20
Station
Sericulturist
Radio Operator, 3521.1400 3132.70
Receiver (Match) 8131.4100 8222.20
Ship
Reception 4226.0100 4221.20
Radio Technician 7422.1400 7243.60
Clerk/Front Desk
(Radio
Executive/Recepti
Manufacturing)
onist
Radio, Television 2656.9900 3472.90
Receptionist 4224.0100 4221.10
and Other
(Hotel)/Front
Announcers, Other
Office Associate
Radiologist 2212.0600 2221.55
Reed Fitter 7312.0600 7312.25
(Harmonium)
Radiology 3211.0101
Technician
Reed Man 8151.1100 8261.77
Rag Machineman 8151.0300 8261.20
Reeler Textile 8151.1000 8261.70
(Woollen Textile)
Reeler, Silk 8151.1300 8261.80
Raising 8154.2000 8264.80
Machineman
Reeling Machine 8122.3000 8223.30
(Textile)
Operator
Rammer, Vertical 7211.0400 7211.40
Refining – 8160.3300 8275.74
Pipe Moulding
Machine Operator
(Oil & Grease)
Rates Inspector, 1324.1700 1226.64
Railway
Refining Machine 8131.6500 8159.54
Operator (Oils and
Raw Juice Tank 8160.4400 8276.73
Fats)/Oil and Fat
Pump Attendant
Plant Operator
Reacher, Hand 7318.5300 7432.52
Reflow Oven 8212.1604
(Textile)
Soldering
Operator
Reactor Convertor 8131.3700 8154.50
VOLUME I 334
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Refractionist 3256.0101 Remote Helpdesk 5244.0302
Technician
Regional Dealer 3322.1601
Development Rendering Artist 2166.0210
Manager/Network
Expansion Renovator, 2651.0500 2452.50
Manager Paintings
Regional Manager 3322.1102 Repair Assistant: 7421.1101
– Customer Care Switches
Regional Parts 3322.0701 Repair Welder 7212.0111
Manager
Repairer, 7318.0800 7332.80
Regional Retail 3322.2101 Fabrics/Fabric
Finance and Mender
Insurance
Reporter 4131.0200 4111.20
Manager
Research 1223.0201
Regional Sales 3322.1201
Associate
Manager (Pre-
Owned Vehicles)
Reservation Clerk, 4221.0300 4211.40
Transport/Reserva
Regional Sales 3322.1501
tion Assistant
Manager (RSM)
Reservoir 3132.0200 8163.20
Regional Service 2431.0101
Caretaker
Marketing
Manager
Restaurant 1412.9900 1305.90
Managers, Other
Regional Service 2431.0102
Process Manager
Restorer, Ceramics 2621.0500 2431.50
Registrar 2619.0300 2429.25
Restorer, 2621.0700 2431.60
Furniture
Registrar 2619.0200 2429.20
(Appellate Side,
Restorer, Lace and 2621.0400 2431.40
High Court)
Textile
Reliability Tester 7543.0803
Restorer, Painting 2621.0300 2431.30
VOLUME I 335
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Restorer, Paper 2621.0600 2431.55 Riveter (Railroad 7214.1000 7214.82
and Prints Equipment)
Retail and 1420.9900 1304.90 Riveting Machine 8156.2600 8266.70
Wholesale Trade Operator
Managers, Other
Road Roller Driver 8342.1700 8332.55
Retail Dealer 5249.0500 5220.55
Roaster, Cocoa 8160.6600 8277.60
Retort Operator 8160.2600 8275.45 Bean
(Food Canning and
Preserving) Robotic Machine 3139.1400 8172.10
Operator
Retoucher, 7321.0900 7343.15
Lithographic Rock Pilot 6224.1200 6159.50
Retoucher, 8132.0500 7344.40 Rock Slicer 3117.0100 3117.10
Photographic
Roll Grinder 7224.0300 7224.25
Riding Instructor 3422.0300 3475.50
Roll Winding 8122.7500 8223.75
Rifling Machine 7223.1900 8211.44 Machine Operator
Operator (Abrasive)
Rig Mouted Drill 8111.0401 Roller Attendant 8160.5900 8277.20
Operator
Roller Coverer 8151.1700 8261.84
Rigger 7215.0100 7215.10
Roller Maker, 7322.0900 7341.70
Rigger: Rigging of 7215.0101 Paper Printing
Heavy Material
Roller, Gold and 7313.0100 7313.10
Riggers and Cable 7215.9900 7215.90 Silver
Splicers, Other
Roller, Hot Rolling 3135.2000 8122.32
Rigging Artist 2166.0203 Mill (Non-Ferrous
Metal)/Mill
Risk Management 2412.0400 2411.70 Operator
Analyst
Roller, Merchant 3135.1700 8122.16
Riveter 7214.0900 7214.80 Mill/Mill Operator
VOLUME I 336
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Roller, Second 8121.2700 8122.44 Routing Operator 8212.2503
Hand, Strip Mill
(Non-Ferrous Rubber and 8141.9900 8231.90
Metal) Rubberised
Product Makers,
Roller, Sheet 3135.1800 8122.20 Other
Mill/Mill Operator
Rubber Fabric 8141.0400 8231.25
Rollerman (Glass) 8181.0600 8131.25 Cutting Machine
Operator
Rollerman, (Food 8160.0900 8273.30
Grains) Rubber Mould 7313.2401
Maker
Rolling Machine 8155.1000 8265.60
Operator (Leather) Rubber Nursery 1311.0901
Manager
Roof Bolter, 8111.1300 7111.47
Mining Rubber Nursery 4311.0801
Office Assistant
Roofers, Other 7121.9900 7131.90
Rubber Nursery 3122.8001
Room Attendant 5151.0202 Supervisor
Room Bearer/Bell 5151.0800 5121.70 Rubber Nursery 6112.0801
Boys/Bell Worker – Budder
Hop/Hotel Porters
Rubber Nursery 6112.0802
Root Cutter, Jute 7318.2100 7431.34 Worker – General
Rope Dancer 2659.0100 3474.10 Rubber Stamp 8141.2400 8231.88
Maker
Roto Artist 2166.0212
Rudderman 8350.0700 8340.50
Roto Curing 8141.0712
Operator Rug Cleaner 9121.0500 9133.50
Rough Assorter 7313.0902 Runner, Mail 9621.0800 9151.70
Rough Marker 7313.0903 Saddler 7536.1900 7442.75
Router, Wood 7523.0500 7423.30 Safety Engineer 2141.2500 2149.85
VOLUME I 337
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Safety Lamp 7542.0200 7119.10 Sales Co-Ordinator 1221.0601
Checker (Media Org)
Safety Testing 7543.0804 Sales 5242.9900 5220.90
Technician Demonstrators,
Other
Safety Testing 7543.1004
Technician – Sales Director 1120.3402
RACW (Media Org)
Safety Testing 7543.1003 Sales Executive – 2433.0401
Technician – TV Consumer
Electronics
Sail and Awning 7533.1000 7436.60
Maker Sales Executive – 5211.0301
Dealership
Sales and 1221.9900 1233.90
Marketing Sales Executive – 2433.0301
Managers, Other Medical
Electronics
Sales and Pre- 2434.0101
Sales Analyst Sales Executive – 2433.0501
Solar Electronics
Sales Associate 5242.0102
Sales Executive 5243.0502
Sales Consultant 3322.1304 (Broadband)
Sales Consultant 3321.0102 Sales Executive 2431.0651
(Auto Finance) (Media Org)
Sales Consultant 3322.1302 Sales Lead (Pre- 3322.1202
(Institutional Owned Vehicles)
Sales)
Sales Manager 3322.1301
Sales Consultant 3322.1203
Sales Manager 1221.0602
(Pre-Owned
(Media Org)
Vehicles)
Sales Manager 1221.0200 1233.20
Sales Consultant 3322.1303
(Retail Trade)
(Retail)
VOLUME I 338
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Sales Manager 1221.0100 1233.10 Salt Reclamation 9329.0300 9322.60
(Wholesale Trade) Worker
Sales Officer (Auto 3322.0802 Sample Checker, 8122.6000 8223.60
Components) Metal Making
Sales Officer (Auto 3321.0101 Sampler, 8111.1900 7111.68
Insurance) Mining/Sampler
Metal/Non-Metal
Sales 3322.0101 3415.10
Representative, Sampling Co- 7543.5001
Technical Ordinator
Sales Supervisor, 3322.0900 3415.70 Sampling Tailor 7531.0101
Retail Trade
Sand Blast 8342.1900 8332.65
Sales Supervisor, 5222.0201 5220.15 Operator,
Retail Trade/CRM Construction
Manager
Sand Blaster 7316.0300 7323.30
Sales Supervisor, 3322.0500 3415.60 (Glass)
Wholesale Trade
Sandalwood 6210.1300 6141.70
Sales Supervisor, 5222.0100 5220.10 Extractor
Wholesale Trade
Sander Operator 7523.1800 8241.30
Sales Training 2424.0401
Manager Sanforizing 8154.2600 8264.86
Machineman
Sales/Pre-Sales 2434.0201
Executive Sanitary Inspector 3257.0100 3222.10
Sales/Service 2424.0402 Sausage Maker 7511.0300 7411.30
Trainer (Dealer)
Saw Grinder, Hand 7224.0900 7224.65
Salesman, Retail 5249.0301 5220.35
Saw Grinder, 8190.0100 8290.40
Trade
Machine
Salesman, 5249.0200 5220.30
Scaperman 8113.0600 8113.35
Wholesale Trade
VOLUME I 339
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Machine Operator
School Inspector 2351.0100 2332.10
Sculptor 2651.0100 2452.10
Scoop Truck 8342.1300 8332.34
Operator
Scutcherman, 8154.0800 8264.66
Bleaching
Scouring Man, 7318.1800 7431.28
Wool/Wool
Seaconny/OS 8350.0300 8340.20
Washing and
(Ordinary Seaman)
Scouring Operator
Sealing and Valve 8141.0900 8231.50
Scouring 3122.3450 7431.26
Fitting Operator
Supervisor, Wool
Seaming Machine 8160.2500 8275.40
Scouringman, 8154.0300 8264.55
Operator (Food
Woollen Yarn
Canning and
Preserving)
Scraper Driver, 8111.2600 7111.78
Mines
Seamless Pipe and 8121.5500 8124.40
Tube Drawers
Scrapper Loader 8342.0301 8332.14
Operator/Loader
Seamless Pipe and 3135.2500 8122.46
Operator
Tube Roller
Scrapper Operator 8342.0200 8332.12
Searcher 3351.0300 3441.30
Screener, Mica 7542.0500 7119.40
Seasoner, Leather 7535.1600 7441.44
Scribes and 4414.9900 4144.90
Seat Laster, 8156.1600 8266.36
Related Clerks,
Machine/Lasting
Other
Machine Operator
Script Editor 2641.0302
Seaweed Gatherer 7541.0500 6152.70
Script Researcher 2641.0602
Second Engineer, 3151.0200 3141.20
Ship
Script Writer 2641.0601 2451.70
Second Officer, 3152.0300 3142.30
Scudder, Hand 7535.0700 7441.26
Ship
Scudder, 8155.0300 8265.25
Secretaries, Other 4120.9900 4115.90
Machine/Scudding
VOLUME I 340
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Secretary/Back 4131.0100 4111.10 Senior Officials of 1114.0200 1142.00
Office Support Employers,
Workers and
Section Controller, 1324.1900 1226.67 Other Economic
Railway Interest
Organizations
Section Officer 3341.0800 3431.10
Senior Officials of 1114.9900 1143.90
Securities and 3311.9900 3411.90
Special Interest
Finance Dealers
Organizations,
and Brokers, Other
Other
Security Analyst 2522.0201
Senior Secondary 2330.0100 2320.10
and Secondary
Security Officer 5414.0101 5169.10
School Teacher,
Arts
Security 5414.0111
Supervisor
Senior Secondary 2330.0300 2320.15
and Secondary
Seed 6130.0201 6112.60
School Teacher,
Grower/Quality
Commerce
Seed Grower
Senior Secondary 2330.0200 2320.12
Seed Processing 6130.0202
and Secondary
Worker
School Teacher,
Science
Seismologist 2114.0700 2114.70
Senior Secondary 2330.9900 2320.90
Selector, Jute 7318.1200 7431.16
and Secondary
Selling Agent 5249.0600 5220.60 School Teachers,
Other
Senior Functioner 7419.0100 7249.10
(Telephone Separator Man 7513.0200 7413.20
Equipment
Sepoy, Customs 5412.0200 5162.20
Manufacturing)
Serang, 8350.0100 8340.10
Senior 1112.9900 1129.90
Deck/Bosun
Government
Officials, Other
Serang, Engine 8182.0500 8162.50
VOLUME I 341
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Room/Engine
Sewer, Hand 7533.0100 7436.10
Bosun
Sewer, Tent 7533.0700 7436.40
Service Advisor 3322.2502
(Hand)
Service Engineer – 2144.0601
Sewers and 8153.9900 8263.90
Breakdown
Embroiders, Other
Service
Sewers, 7533.9900 7436.90
Service Engineer – 2144.1401
Embroiderers and
Installation
Related Workers,
Other
Service Engineer – 2144.1402
Installation and
Sewing Machine 8153.0101 8263.10
Commissioning
Operator, General
Service Office 3322.2504
Shactor 7511.0600 7411.50
Executive
Shaft Worker 8111.2300 7111.75
Service Office 3322.2503
Manager
Shaper 7223.0800 8211.22
Service Supervisor 3322.2501
Shaper Wood 7523.0400 7423.25
Service Training 2424.0501
Shaving Machine 8181.2600 8139.50
Centre In-Charge
Operator
(Abrasive)
Set Framer, Silk 7318.2800 7431.52
Shearer, Animal, 6121.1300 6121.70
Setter, Automatic 7223.0400 7223.40
Other/Shearer,
Machine
Other Animals
Setter, Drop 7223.0300 7223.30
Forging Machine
Shearer, Sheep 6121.1200 6121.65
Settling Tank Man, 8160.5300 8276.82
Shearing and 8121.2300 8122.36
Sugar
Upcoiler Operator
(Non-Ferrous
Set-Top Box 7422.1201
Metal)/Coil
Installer/Service
Operator
Technician
VOLUME I 342
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Sheet Cutter 8122.7600 8223.76 Ships’ Deck 8350.9900 8340.90
(Abrasive) Ratings, Barge
Crews and
Sheet Maker 8141.1100 8231.65 Boatmen, Other
(Rubber)
Ships’ Engine 8182.9900 8162.90
Sheet Metal 7223.2400 8211.61 Room Ratings,
Machine Operator Other
Sheet Metal 7213.0101 7213.10 Shipwright 7115.0700 7124.45
Worker,
General/Sheet Shirestedar 3411.0200 3432.20
Metal Worker –
Hand Tools and Shirt Maker 7531.0500 7433.30
Manually
Shoe Cleaning and 9510.9900 9120.90
Operated
Other Street
Machines
Services
Sheet Metal 7213.0200 7213.20 Elementary
Worker, Structural Occupations,
Other
Sheet Metal 7213.9900 7213.90
Workers, Other Shoe Repairer, 7536.0300 7442.14
Cobbler/Shoemak
Shell Gatherer 7541.0400 6152.60 er Cobbler
Sheriff 2619.0900 2429.60 Shoemaker and 7536.9900 7442.90
Related Workers,
Shift In-Charge 3135.1401 Other
Furnace Ferro
Alloys Shoemaker, Hand 7536.0100 7442.10
Ship and Aircraft 3151.9900 3141.90 Shoemaker, 7536.0200 7442.12
Controllers and Orthopaedic
Technicians, Other
Shop Assistant 5223.0100 5220.40
Ship’s Deck 3152.9900 3142.90
Officers and Pilots, Shop 5211.0200 5230.20
Other Attendant/Sales
Assistant
VOLUME I 343
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Shot Blaster 8122.6200 8223.62 Silk Screen Printer 7322.1200 7346.20
Shotfirer 7542.0100 7112.10 Silviculturist 2132.0500 2213.50
Shotfirers and 7542.9900 7112.90 Singeing 8154.2700 8264.87
Blasters, Other Machineman/Sing
eing Machine
Shovel Operator, 8111.2700 7111.80 Operator
Mines
Singer 2652.0300 2453.30
Showroom 4226.0201
Hostess/Host Sirdar, Colliery 3121.0500 8118.30
Shrimp Farmer 6221.0101 Site Engineer – 7412.1002
Control Panel
Shunting Worker 8312.0200 8312.20
Site Surveyor/R F 7422.1801
Sickle Dresser, 7542.0400 7119.30 Site Surveyor
Mica
Size Maker 8131.1700 8152.45
Siever, Machine 8160.1100 8273.50 (Abrasive)
Sieving Machine 8131.0800 8151.60 Size Mixer (Textile) 8151.1900 8261.86
Attendant,
Chemical Sizing Machine 8122.7100 8223.71
Operator
Signaller, Ship 3521.2000 3132.83 (Abrasive Wheel)
Signalman, 8312.0100 8312.10 Skin Diver 7541.0700 7216.20
Railway
Skincare Specialist 5142.0300 5141.45
Signalman, Tram 8331.0600 8323.60
Skiver, Hand 7536.0600 7442.20
Signwriter, 7316.1200 7324.90 (Footwear)
Decorative
Painters, Skiver, 8156.1001 8266.26
Engravers and Machine/Skiving
Etchers, Other Operator
Silicone Painting 8212.1902 Skiving Machine 8122.7300 8223.73
Operator Operator
VOLUME I 344
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
(Abrasive)
Snuff Maker 7516.1000 7416.55
Slag Flusher 8121.3300 8122.56
Soap Machine 8131.8400 8159.87
Attendant
Slaughterer 7511.0200 7411.20
Social Ecologist 2632.0200 2442.20
Slide Examiner, 3111.0700 3111.60
Palaeontology
Social Work 3412.9900 3460.90
Associate
Slide Examiner, 3111.0600 3111.50
Professionals
Petrology
Social Work 2635.9900 2446.90
Slinger 7215.0200 7215.20
Professionals,
Other
Slip Maker 8181.2700 8139.60
(Ceramics)
Sociologist, 2632.0100 2442.10
General
Slitting Machine 8122.7700 8223.77
Operator
Sociologists, 2632.9900 2442.90
(Abrasive)
Anthropologists
and Related
Slitting Machine 8141.0500 8231.30
Professionals,
Operator (Cycle
Other
Tyre)
Sock Knitter, 8152.0800 8262.40
Slitting Machine 8121.2500 8122.40
Automatic
Operator (Non-
Machine
Ferrous Metal)
Sock 8152.0700 8262.35
Sliver Lap 7318.2900 7431.54
Knitter/Knitting
Man/Combing
Machine Operator
Preparatory
– Socks Knitting
Operator
Softener Feeder 7318.2000 7431.32
Slotter 7223.1100 8211.28
and Receiver, Jute
Smartphones 7422.2301
Software 2512.0204
Repair Technician
Developer –
Snake Charmer 2659.1100 3474.70 Application
Development
VOLUME I 345
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Software 2512.0301 Sole Stitcher, Hand 7536.1500 7442.60
Developer –
Product Sole Stitcher, 8156.1500 8266.35
Development and Machine
Delivery
Solicitor General 2611.0200 2421.20
Software Engineer 2512.0201 2132.20 of India
Soil 2132.0400 2213.40 Solution and 8131.6300 8159.42
Conservationist Dough Making,
Operator, Rubber
Soil Scientist 2132.0300 2213.30
Sorter 9329.0600 9322.74
Solanaceous Crop 6111.1501
Cultivator Sorter, Brick and 7314.1300 7329.40
Tile
Solar Energy 2143.0100 2149.05
System Designer Sorter, Glass 7315.2400 7329.30
Products
Solar Panel 7421.1401
Installation Sorter, Hides and 7535.0100 7441.10
Technician Skin
Solar Photo Voltaic 7421.1402 Sorter, Mail 9621.0900 9151.75
System Installation
Sorter, Paper Pulp 8171.0400 8142.25
Technician
Sorter, Timber 6210.1500 6141.80
Solder Masking & 8212.2504
Legend Printing
Sorting Operator 8212.1903
Operator
Sound Designer 2153.0511
Soldering and 7212.0501
Brazing Operator
Sound Editor 3521.0511
Sole Leveller, 8156.2000 8266.45
Sound Engineer 2153.0500 2144.50
Machine
Sound Engineer, 2153.0501
Sole Rounding 8156.0500 8266.18
Media
Machine Operator
Sound Recording 3521.0401 3131.40
VOLUME I 346
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Equipment Frame Tenter
Operator/Sound
Assistant Spinner, Jute 7318.4500 7432.26
Soybean Cultivator 6111.0501 Spinning Master 2141.1400 2149.35
Spare Parts 4321.0101 Splicer (Rope and 7215.0300 7215.30
Operations Cables)
Executive
Splicing – Machine 8159.0200 8269.20
Spare Parts 4321.0402 Operator,
Operations In- Automatic
Charge (Textile)
Special Needs 2352 Splint Drying 8122.8000 8223.80
Teachers Chamberman
(Match)
Specialist Medical 2212.9900 2212.90
Practitioners, Splint Feeder 8122.7900 8223.79
Other (Match)
Specialized Sewing 8153.0103 Splitter, 8156.1700 8266.38
Machine Operator Machine/Splitting
Machine Operator
Speech Language 2266.0401
Pathologist and Splitting and 8155.0501
Audiologist Sammying
Operator (Leather)
Speech Pathologist 2266.0200 3229.20
Sports Coach 3422.0201 3475.45
Speech Therapist 2266.0100 3229.10
and Audiologist Sports Coaches, 3422.9900 3475.90
Instructors and
Speeder Machine 8122.7000 8223.70 Officials, Other
Operator
(Abrasive Wheel) Sports Goods 7522.1800 7422.58
Maker, Wood
Spinner, Coir 7318.4600 7432.28
Sports Masseur 2264.0401
Spinner, Frame 8151.0600 8261.35
(Textile)/Ring Sports, Recreation 1431.9900 1309.90
VOLUME I 347
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
and Cultural
Stamper, Hand 9321.0400 9322.40
Centre Manager,
Other
Stamper/Forging 7221.0500 7221.50
Operator
Spot Remover 9121.0400 9133.40
Station Director, 1120.3400 1218.30
Spray Painter, 7316.0900 7324.40
Radio/TV
(Ceramics)
Station Master, 1324.1500 1226.60
Spreader Feeder, 7318.3600 7431.70
Railway
Jute
Station Master, 1324.0300 1226.15
Spreader Operator 8342.1600 8332.50
Roadways
Spreader, 7318.3700 7431.71
Station Officer, 3521.1100 3132.55
Receiver, Jute
Overseas
Communication
Sprinkler and 8111.2601
Other Vehicle
Station Technical 3521.1200 3132.60
Driver
Assistant,
Overseas
Spun Pipe 8121.4500 8122.78
Communication
Machine Operator
Stationary Engine 3131.0200 8161.20
Stableman 6121.1000 6121.55
Driver, Internal
Combustion
Stage and Film 2654.9900 2455.90
Directors, Other
Stationary Engine 3131.0100 8161.10
Driver, Steam
Staker, Hand 7535.1000 7441.32
Statistical 3314.0200 3433.20
Staker, 8155.0700 8265.40
Assistant
Machine/Staking
Machine Operator
Statistical Clerks 4312.0100 4122.10
Stall and Market 5211.9900 5230.90
Statistical Finance 4312.9900 4122.90
Salespersons,
and Insurance
Other
Clerks, Others
Stamp Mill 8112.0300 8112.20
Statistical, 3314.9900 3433.90
Operator
Mathematical and
VOLUME I 348
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Related Associate Goods and
Professionals, Garments)
Other
Stitcher, Hand 7536.2100 7442.78
Statistician 2120.0300 2122.10
Stitching Operator 8156.0901
Statistician, 2120.0400 2122.20 (Footwear)
Applied
Stock Clerks, Other 4321.9900 4131.90
Stencil Cutter, Silk 7322.1100 7346.10
Screen Printing Stock House 3122.0300 8128.30
Foreman
Stencil Printing 8212.1605
Operator Stock Verifier 4321.0301 4131.30
Stenciler 9321.0300 9322.30 Stockist 5249.0700 5220.65
Stentering 8154.2100 8264.81 Stockman 3240.0200 3227.20
Machineman/Sten
Stoking Car 8342.2201
tering Operator
Operator Ferro
Stereo Matrix 7321.0500 7342.10 Alloys
Moulder
Stone Carver 7113.0400 7113.40
Stereotype Caster 7321.0600 7342.20
Stone Cutter, 7113.0200 7113.20
Steward, Hotel 5131.0200 5123.20 Hand
Steward, 5111.0200 5111.20 Stone Cutter, 8112.0800 8112.55
Ship/Mess Man Machine
Still Man Gas 3134.0200 8155.20 Stone Cutter, 8111.1200 7111.45
Plant/Gas Plant Mines
Operator (Petrol
Stone Dresser, 7113.0300 7113.30
Refining)
Hand
Stingy Cigarette 8160.8900 8279.60
Stone Mason 7112.0100 7122.10
Slitting Machine
Operator
Stone Modeller 2651.0300 2452.30
Stitcher (Leather 8153.0102
VOLUME I 349
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Chat Thelawala
Stone Polisher, 7113.0500 7113.50
Hand
Street Vendors, 9520.9900 9112.90
Non-Food
Stone Polisher, 8112.0900 8112.60
Products, Other
Machine
Stress 2152.0301 2144.65
Stone Sawyer, 8112.0700 8112.50
Analyst/Computer
Machine
-Aided Test
Executive
Stone Splitters, 7113.9900 7113.90
Cutters and
Structural Metal 7214.9900 7214.90
Carvers, Other
Prepares and
Erectors, Other
Storage Assistant 4321.0104
Stuntman 3435.0200 3474.25
Store Distributor 4321.0200 4131.20
Sub-Editor 2641.0400 2451.25
Store Keeper 4321.0100 4131.10
Sub-Inspector, 3355.0200 3450.20
Store Manager 3322.1306
Police
Store Ops 4321.0501
Sub-Inspector, 3122.5800 7248.30
Assistant
Telephone
Storyboard Artist 2166.0209
Sub-Post Master 3341.1200 3439.10
Stowing Worker 8111.1700 7111.60
Subsistence Crop 6310.9900 6200.90
Straightening 7126.0400 7136.40 Farmers, Others
Machine Operator
Sugar Technologist 2141.1800 2149.55
(Iron & Steel)
Sugarcane 6111.0701
Strainer, Liquid 8131.2500 8153.20
Cultivator
Straining Operator 8131.6100 8159.38
Suitcase Maker 7536.2300 7442.80
(Rubber Reclaim)
Sulphitation Man, 8160.5100 8276.80
Street Food 5212.9900 9111.90
Sugar
Vendors,
Other/Khomchaw
Sulphur Burner 8131.7800 8159.78
ala, Dhabawala,
VOLUME I 350
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Foreman,
Super Finishing 7224.0701
Chemical
Technician
Processing and
Related Activities
Supervisor and 3122.5400 7238.30
Foreman, Aircraft
Supervisor and 3122.7200 7418.40
Repairing
Foreman, Dairy
Products/Dairy
Supervisor and 3122.4900 7228.10
Technologist
Foreman,
Blacksmith
Supervisor and 3122.5600 7248.10
Foreman,
Supervisor and 3122.7100 7418.30
Electrical and
Foreman, Brewing,
Electronic
Aerated Water
Equipment
and Beverage
Making
Supervisor and 3122.6900 7418.10
Foreman, Food
Supervisor and 3122.3600 7424.05
Processing/Produc
Foreman, Brush
tion Supervisor
Making
Supervisor and 3122.0800 8138.10
Supervisor and 3122.2500 8248.20
Foreman, Glass
Foreman,
Forming and
Carpentry, Cabinet
Related Activities
Making and
Related Wood
Supervisor and 3122.3200 8268.50
Working Processes
Foreman, Harness
and Saddle Making
Supervisor and 3122.0900 8138.20
Foreman,
Supervisor and 3122.2900 8268.20
Ceramics and
Foreman, Hosiery
Related Activities
Supervisor and 3123.0200 7138.20
Supervisor and 3122.4100 8290.20
Foreman,
Foreman,
Insulation
Checking, Sorting,
Packing and
Supervisor and 3122.3300 8268.60
Related Activities
Foreman, Leather
Goods Making
Supervisor and 3122.1300 8158.10
VOLUME I 351
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Supervisor and 3122.1900 8218.20 Supervisor and 3123.0500 7148.10
Foreman, Machine Foreman, Painting
Tool Operations
Supervisor and 3122.2600 8258.10
Supervisor and 3122.5200 7238.10 Foreman, Paper
Foreman, and Paper Board
Machinery Fitting Product Making
and Repairing
Supervisor and 3122.1100 8148.20
Supervisor and 3122.4000 8290.10 Foreman, Paper
Foreman, Material Pulp and
and Freight Papermaking
Handling
Supervisor and 3122.1400 8158.20
Supervisor and 3122.0500 8128.50 Foreman,
Foreman, Metal Petroleum
Drawing and Refining and
Extruding Related
Activities/Operato
Supervisor and 3122.0400 8128.40 r/Engineering
Foreman, Metal Assistant
Treating (Mechanical/Electr
ical/Civil/Chemical
Supervisor and 3121.0300 8118.20
) Related Activities
Foreman, Mineral
Treating Supervisor and 3122.6600 7348.10
Foreman,
Supervisor and 3121.0100 8118.10
Photolitho, Photo
Foreman, Mining
Engraving and
and Quarrying
Dark Room
Operations
Supervisor and 3122.5300 7238.20
Foreman, Motor
Supervisor and 3122.2100 8238.20
Vehicle Repairing
Foreman, Plastic
Products Making
Supervisor and 3122.6300 7318.20
Foreman, Musical
Supervisor and 3123.0300 7138.30
Instrument
Foreman,
Making
Plumbing and Pipe
VOLUME I 352
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Fitting
Supervisor and 3122.3900 8279.20
Foreman, Tobacco
Supervisor and 3122.6200 7318.10
Product Making
Foreman,
Precision
Supervisor and 3122.5000 7228.20
Instrument
Foreman, Tool
Making (Except
Making/Die
Electrical)
Making
Supervisor and 3122.6700 7348.20
Supervisor and 3122.4200 7218.10
Foreman, Printing
Foreman, Welding
and Related Work
and Flame Cutting
Supervisor and 3122.2000 8238.10
Supervisor and 3121.0200 8118.15
Foreman, Rubber
Foreman, Well
Goods Making
Drilling
Supervisor and 3122.4300 7218.20
Supervisor and 3122.1000 8148.10
Foreman, Sheet
Foreman, Wood
and Structural
Preparation and
Metal Working
Papermaking
Supervisor and 3122.3100 8268.40
Supervisor and 3122.2400 8248.10
Foreman,
Foreman, Wood
Shoemaking
Working
(Machine)
Supervisor and 3122.1800 8218.10
Foreman, Stone
Supervisor 3122.6511
Cutting and
Faceting and
Carving
Polishing
Supervisor and 3122.3000 8268.30
Supervisor, 9332.0500 9332.50
Foreman, Tanning
Animal-Drawn and
and Pelt Dressing
Manually
Operated
Supervisor and 3122.3800 8279.10
Transport
Foreman, Tobacco
Equipment
Preparation, Cigar
and Cigarette
Making Supervisor, 3521.0600 3132.10
VOLUME I 353
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Broadcasting
Supervisors and 3122.0100 8128.10
Audiovisual
Foremen, Metal
Projection and
Making,
Sound Equipment
Converting and
Operations
Refining
Supervisor, 3351.0200 3441.20
Supervisors and 3122.1700 8168.20
Customs
Foremen,
Stationary Engine
Supervisor, Front 5151.0701 5121.25
and Related
Office/Customer
Equipment
Service Executive
(Meet and Greet)
Supervisors and 3122.3500 7433.05
Foremen, Tailoring
Supervisor, 3122.6400 7318.30
and Dress Making
Jewellery,
Engraving and
Supervisors and 3122.3400 7435.05
Precision Metal
Foremen, Textile-
Workers
Related Products
Supervisor, 3341.0400 4142.20
Supply Chain Field 3323.0602
Telephone
Assistant
Supervisor, 3341.0600 4142.30
Supply, 1324.9900 1226.90
Wireless
Distribution and
Related Managers
Supervisors and 3123.9900 7148.90
and General
Foremen and
Managers, Other
Related Trades
Workers in
Support Engineer 2511.0106
Painting, Building
Structure
Surface Grinder 7224.0400 7224.30
Cleaning, Other
Surface Treatment 8122.0101
Supervisors and 3121.9900 8118.90
Technician
Foremen in Mining
and Mineral Surgeon, General 2211.0200 2221.15
Processing Plant
Operation Surveyor, 2165.0600 2148.50
Activities, Other Hydrographic
VOLUME I 354
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Administration
Surveyor, Mine 2165.0500 2148.40
Assistant/Junior
System
Surveyor, 2165.0400 2148.30
Administrator
Photogrammetric
System Analyst 2151.0601
Surveyor, Tidal 3112.0600 3112.60
(PCB Design)
Surveyor, 2165.0200 2148.20
System Analysts 2511.0100 2131.10
Topographical
System Analysts, 2511.9900 2131.90
Sweeper, Dry 9613.0300 9162.10
Other
Sweeper, Sewer 9613.0500 9162.30
System 2519.0100 2132.50
Sweeper, Wet 9613.0400 9162.20 Programmer
Sweepers and 9613.9900 9162.90 Systems Designer 2151.0602
Related Labourers, (PCB Design)
Other
Tabla Maker 7312.1300 7312.45
Sweet Meat 7512.0400 7412.25 (Musical
Maker Instrument)
Symmetry 8189.0601 Table Cutter 7313.1304
Analyser Machine
Tablet Coater 8131.7100 8159.64
Operator
Tablet Machine 8131.7000 8159.62
Synthetic Fibre 8131.6400 8159.45
Operator
Maker
Tablet Machine 8142.0100 8232.10
Syrup Maker 8160.7700 8278.40
Operator
Syrup Mixing Plant 8160.7800 8278.45
Tagger and 9321.0205
Operator
Labeller
Syrup Plant 8160.7600 8278.35
Tailor, Fur 7531.1200 7434.10
Operator
Tailor, General 7531.0100 7433.10
Syruper 8160.7900 8278.47
Tailor, Tent 7533.1100 7436.70
System 3513.0100 3121.10
VOLUME I 355
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
(Machine) Worker
Tailors, 7531.9900 7434.90 Tea Taster 7515.0100 7415.10
Dressmakers,
Furriers and Teacher for 2352.0100 3330.10
Hatters, Other Visually Impaired
Tanner, Rotary 8155.1101 8265.70 Teacher for 2352.0200 3330.20
Drum, Continuous Hearing-Impaired
Process (Leather
Teacher for 2352.0400 3330.40
Manufacturing)/Dr
Differently-Abled
um Operator
(Physical)
Tape 2622.0300 2432.25
Teacher, Infant 2342.0100 3320.10
Librarian/Librarian
School/Teacher
Digital/Librarian
Pre-Primary
Media
Teacher for 2352.0300 3330.30
Tapper, Palm Juice 6112.0200 6112.40
Differently-Abled
Tapper, Rubber 6112.0300 6112.50 (Mental)
Tappers 9215.0200 9203.90 Teacher for 2352.9900 3330.90
Differently-Abled,
Tar Supervisor 7112.0500 7122.50 Other
Taster (Food) 7515.0300 7415.30 Teaser (Feeder 7318.2200 7431.40
and Receiver) Jute
Tattoo Artist 3435.0100 3471.30
Technical 5242.0101 5220.25
Taxidermist 3141.0300 3211.30 Demonstrator
(Sale)/Area
Taxing Master 2619.0500 2429.40
Technical Lead
Taxonomist 2133.0300 2211.30
Technical Support 4222.0101
Executive – Non-
Tea Blender 8160.6300 8277.40
Voice
Tea Maker 8160.5700 8277.10
Technical Support 4222.0102
Executive – Voice
Tea Plantation 6112.0501
VOLUME I 356
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Technical Writer – 2641.0902 Telecom Terminal 2153.0102
Application Equipment
Development Application
(Native
Technical Writer – 2641.0901 Applications)
Product
Documentation Telecom Terminal 2153.0101
Equipment
Technical Writer – 2641.0903 Application
Technical Developer
Documentation/ (Android)
Writing
Telecommunicatio 2153.0100 2144.10
Technician 3113.0111 n Engineer,
Furnace General
Transformers:
Ferro Alloys Telecommunicatio 3522.9900
n Engineering
Technician 7311.0101 Technicians, Other
Instrumentation
Telecommunicatio 2153.9900
Technologist, 2145.1200 2146.70 n Engineers, Other
Alcohol
Telecommunicatio 3522.0100 3114.20
Technologist, 2145.0800 2146.55 n, Technician
Food/Chemical
Engineer Telemarketing 5211.0300 5230.30
Sales
Technologist, Fuel 2145.0900 2146.60 Person/Telemarke
ting Sales
Technologist, 2145.1100 2146.68
Operator
Paper
Telephone 3522.0300 3114.40
Technologist, 2145.1400 2146.85
Inspector
Plastics
Telephone 4223.0200 4222.20
Technologist, 2145.1300 2146.80
Operator, Local
Rubber
Telephone 4223.0300 4222.30
Telecaller 5211.0302
Operator, PBX
VOLUME I 357
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
(Broadband)
Telephone 4223.0100 4222.10
Operator, Trunk
Territory Sales 1221.0501
Manager (Prepaid)
Telephone 4223.9900 4222.90
Switchboard
Territory Sales 3322.1002
Operators, Other
Manager (Used
Vehicles)
Teleprinter 4131.0500 4112.10
Operator
Territory Service 1213.0202
Manager
Television 3521.0700 3132.20
Broadcasting
Test and Repair 7422.2201
Station Operator
Technician
Television Chassis 3114.0200 3152.60
Test Driver 8331.0501
Inspector/Televisi
on Technician
Test Engineer – IT 2519.0302
Services
Television 7422.1100 7243.40
Installation Man
Test Engineer – 2512.0202
Software
Television Repair 7422.1302
Technician
Test Engineer – 2519.0402
Software Products
Television Service 7422.1300 7243.50
and Repairman
Test Engineer 3115.0202
Product/Vehicle
Teller, Bank 4211.0400 4212.10
Test Technician 7231.0201
Temperer, Metal 8121.4900 8123.30
Tester 9329.0500 9322.72
Tennoning 7523.1100 7423.55
Machine Operator
Tester/Test 2523.0301
Engineer –
Terminal Manager 1321.0200 1222.45
Hardware
Territory Sales 3322.1001
Testing and 2152.0902
Manager
Validation
Engineer
Territory Sales 1221.0401
Manager
VOLUME I 358
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Testing Technician 7421.1202 Tile Setter 7122.0100 7132.10
Testing Technician 7543.1101 Timberman, Mines 8111.1500 7111.50
Textile Designer 2163.0600 3471.45 Timekeeper 4110.0500 4190.60
Textile 2141.1000 2149.20 Timekeeper, 4110.0600 4190.70
Technologist Motor Transport
Texturing Artist 2166.0204 Tin Coater 7213.0500 7213.50
Thatch Cutter 6210.0900 6141.50 Tindal, Engine 8182.0600 8162.60
Room
Thatcher 7111.0200 7121.20
Tinsmith/Whitesm 7213.0400 7213.40
Third Engineer, 3151.0300 3141.30 ith
Ship
Tobacco Curer 7516.0100 7416.10
Third Officer, Ship 3152.0400 3142.40
Tobacco Grader 7516.0200 7416.15
Thread Cutting 8112.1100 8112.65
Machine Tobacco Preparers 7516.9900 7416.90
Operator, and Tobacco
Stoneware Products Makers,
Other
Thread Grinder 7224.0500 7224.35
Tool Designer 3115.1301
Through Hole 8212.1602
Assembly Tool Engineer 2144.0300 2145.20
Operator
Tool Maker 7222.0200 7222.20
Ticket Collector, 5112.0500 5112.42
Railway Tool Makers and 7222.9900 7222.90
Related Workers,
Ticket Examiner, 5112.0700 5112.46 Other
Motor Transport
Tool Room 3115.1302
Tile Layer, Roof 7121.0100 7131.10 Supervisor
Tile Presser 7122.0300 7132.30 Tool Setter, 7223.0100 7223.10
(Mosaic) General
VOLUME I 359
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Ordinator
Tool Setter, Press 7223.0200 7223.20
Traffic Hand, 9331.0400 9331.40
Topographical 3112.0400 3112.40
Gliding
Auxiliary
Traffic Inspector, 1324.0400 1226.17
Tourist Guide 5113.0200 5113.20
Motor Transport
Tower Technician 7422.3001
Traffic Inspector, 1324.0600 1226.25
Railway
Town Planner 2164.0100 2141.20
Traffic Inspector, 1324.0700 1226.29
Toxicologist 2212.1600 2212.35
Tram
(Pharmaceutical)
Traffic Officer, Air 1324.1100 1226.39
Toy Maker, Wood 7522.1400 7422.48
Service/Traffic
Tracer 3118.0800 3118.80 Controller
Track Repairer 9312.0200 9312.20 Traffic Planner 2164.0200 2141.30
(Rail Transport)
Traffic Regulator, 4323.0300 4133.27
Tracker 6224.0400 6154.40 Tram
Traffic Shunter, 8312.0400 8312.40
Tractor Driver, 8341.0300 8331.30 Railway
Construction
Traffic Timetable 4323.0500 4133.40
Tractor Mechanic 7231.0300 7231.30 Inspector, Tram
Tractor Operator, 8341.0101 8331.10 Train Examiner 3115.1600 3115.70
Farm
Trainee Associate 5223.0105
Traditional 2230.9900 3241.90
Medicine Trainer, Animal 2659.1300 3474.60
Practitioners,
Other Training and Staff 2424.9900
Development
Traffic Controller, 3154.0200 3144.20 Professionals,
Air Service Other
Traffic Co- 2431.0671 Tram Car Driver 8331.0100 8323.10
VOLUME I 360
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Tram Car Driver 8332.0200 8324.20 Travel Consultants 4221.0100
(Mines) & Organizers
Trammer, Mines 8111.2800 7111.85 Travel Consultants 4221.9900 4211.90
and Clerks, Others
Transfer Moulding 8141.0714
Operator Travelling Ticket 5112.0600 5112.44
Examiner, Railway
Transferor, 8171.1900 8143.45
Handmade Paper Treating Plant 3134.0800 8155.75
Operator
Transferor, 7321.1500 7343.45
Photomechanical Tree and Shrub 6112.9900 6112.90
Crop Growers,
Translator 2643.0200 2444.20 Other
Transmission 3114.1201 Tree Trimmer and 6310.0100 6200.10
Engineer Pruner
Transport Clerks, 4323.9900 4133.90 Trench Digging 8342.0700 8332.22
Other Machine Operator
Transport 5112.9900 5112.90 Trimmer (Tyre 8141.2000 8231.84
Conductors, Other Building)
Transport 9331.0600 9331.60 Trimmer, Hand 7536.1700 7442.70
Equipment
Operators and Trimmer, Machine 8156.2100 8266.50
Drivers, Other
Tripler Machine 8342.1400 8332.36
Transport Service 9331.0700 9331.70 Operator
Operator
Trolley Driver 8331.0200 8323.20
Trapper 6224.0300 6154.30
Trouser Maker 7531.0400 7433.25
Travel Agent 5113.0100 5113.10
Tube and Rod 8181.0800 8131.30
Travel Attendants 5111.9900 5111.90 Drawer (Glass)
and Travel
Stewards, Other Tube Extruder 8141.0302
Operator
VOLUME I 361
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Operators, Other
Tuber Crop 6111.1601
Cultivator
Tyre 8141.1701 8231.80
Builder/Radial
Tuberculosis 2212.0700 2221.60
Building Operator
Specialist
Tyre Building 8141.1702
Tubesmith, Boiler 7214.0400 7214.40
Operator –
Commercial
Tub-Sizer, 8171.2000 8143.50
Vehicles
Handmade Paper
Tyre Building 8141.1703
Tungsten Inert Gas 7212.0105
Operator –
Welder
Passenger Vehicles
Turbine Operator, 3131.0400 8161.40
Tyre Inflation 9623.0501
Hydel
Attendant
Turbine Operator, 3131.0300 8161.30
Tyre Moulder 8141.1800 8231.81
Steam
Tyre Moulding 8141.1801
Turner Pottery 7314.0600 7321.35
Operator
and Porcelain
Tyre Repairer 8141.2100 8231.85
Turner/Conventio 7223.0601 8211.15
nal Turning
Umbrella 7533.0900 7436.50
Examiner
Turret and 7223.0700 8211.20
Capstan Lathe
Umbrella Maker 7533.0800 7436.45
Operator
Umpire 3422.0400 3475.60
TV Repair 7421.1301
Technician
Undertaker 5163.0100 5143.10
Twister 7318.4700 7432.30
Undertakers and 5163.9900 5143.90
Embalmers, Other
Type Caster 7322.0500 7341.50
Underwater 7541.9900 7216.90
Type Dresser 7322.0800 7341.65
Divers, Other
Typists and Word 4131.9900 4112.90
University and 2310.1100 2310.70
Processing
VOLUME I 362
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
College Teacher, Professors,
Agricultural Information
Subjects Technology
University and 2310.0100 2310.10 University and 2310.0400 2310.20
College Teacher, College Teacher,
Arts Law/Professors/As
Subjects/Professor sistant Professors,
s/Assistant Education
Professors, Arts
Subjects University and 2310.0500 2310.30
College Teacher,
University and 2310.0200 2310.15 Law/Professors/As
College Teacher, sistant Professors,
Commerce Law
Subjects/Professor
s/Assistant University and 2310.0300 2310.18
Professors, College Teacher,
Commerce Management
Subjects Subjects/Professor
s/Assistant
University and 2310.0700 2310.45 Professors,
College Teacher, Management
Engineering/ Subjects
Professors/Assista
nt Professors, University and 2310.0900 2310.50
Engineering College Teacher,
Medicine and
University and 2310.1200 2310.80 Surgery/Professor
College Teacher, s/Assistant
Fine Professors,
Arts/Professors/As Medicine and
sistant Professors, Surgery
Fine Arts
University and 2310.0600 2310.40
University and 2310.0800 2310.48 College Teacher,
College Teacher, Science
Information Subjects/Professor
Technology/Profes s/Assistant
sors/Assistant Professors,
VOLUME I 363
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Science Subjects
Vacuum Plastic 8142.0800 8232.40
Forming Machine
University and 2310.1000 2310.60
Operator
College Teacher,
Veterinary
Valuer 3315.0100 3417.40
Science/Professors
/Assistant
Valuers and Loss 3315.9900 3417.90
Professors,
Assessors, Other
Veterinary Science
Varnishers and 7132.9900 7142.90
Upholsterer, 7534.0100 7437.10
Related Workers,
Furniture
Other
Upholsterer, 7534.0200 7437.20
Vat Man, 8171.1800 8143.40
Orthopaedic
Handmade Paper
Appliances
Vehicle Assembly 8211.1201
Upholsterer, 7534.0300 7437.30
Fitter
Vehicle
Vehicle, Window 9122.9900 9142.90
Upholsterers and 7534.9900 7437.90
and Related
Related Workers,
Cleaners, Other
Other
Vending Machine 9623.0100 9153.10
UPS Assembly 8212.2003 Attendant
Operator
Vending Machine 9623.9900 9153.90
Urologist 2212.0900 2221.68 Money Collectors,
Meter Readers
User Interface 2513.0201 and Related
Developer Workers, Other
Usher 9629.0100 9152.40 Vendor 3323.0301
Development
Vaccinator, 3240.0100 3227.10 Executive
Veterinary
Veneer Cutter 8172.0700 8141.55
Vacuum Plant 8212.1803
Operator Venereologist 2212.1000 2221.70
VOLUME I 364
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Guidance
Ventriloquist 2659.0600 3474.40
Officer/Career
Counsellors
Verification 2152.0901
Engineer
Vocational 2635.1000 2446.80
Rehabilitation
Veterinarian, 2250.0200 2226.10
Counsellor
General
Voice Over Artist 2655.0301
Veterinarian, 2250.0600 2226.50
Poultry
Voice Pathologist 2266.0300 3229.30
Veterinarian, 2250.0300 2226.20
Volume 7316.0400 7323.40
Surgeon
Man/Calibrating
Technician
Veterinarians, 2250.9900 2226.90
Other
Wafer Baking 8160.1500 8274.10
Machine Operator
Veterinary 3240.9900 3227.90
(Baking)
Technicians and
Assistants, Other
Wagon Driller 8111.0300 8111.30
VFX Editor 2166.0211
Waiter, 5131.0401 5123.40
Institutional/Food
Viewer, Workshop 7311.0500 7311.35
& Beverage
Village Blacksmith 7221.0200 7221.20 Service –Steward
Waiters, Other 5131.9900 5123.90
Village Level 3353.0100 3443.10
Worker Warder, Jail 5413.0100 5163.10
Village Postman 4412.0300 4142.47 Warehouse Binner 4321.0602
Viniculturist 6111.1200 6112.20 Warehouse Packer 4321.0603
Vision Technician 3256.0202 Warehouse Picker 4321.0601
Visual Artists, 2651.9900 2452.90 Warehouse 1324.1201
Other Supervisor
Vocational 2423.0100 2412.40 Warehouse 9333.0201
VOLUME I 365
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Worker Management
Engineer,
Warp 8152.1100 8262.55 Radioactive
Knitter/Knitting Material
Machine Operator
– Warp Knitter Wastewater 2142.1002
Systems Design
Warp Tying 8152.1600 8262.80
Machineman Wastewater 3132.0400 8163.40
Treatment Plant
Warping Boy 8151.1500 8261.82 Operator
(Textile)/Wrapper
Watch Repairer 7311.0200 7311.20
Warranty In- 3315.0501
Charge Watchman 5414.0400 9152.20
Warranty 4321.0701 Water Carrier 9621.1300 9162.40
Processor
Waterproofer, 8151.2000 8261.87
Washer 9122.0201 Textile
Washing Machine 7514.0600 7414.38 Wave Soldering 8212.1808
Attendant, Cleaner Machine Operator
(Food Grain)
Wax Model 3122.6501
Washing Machine 8157.0100 8264.10 Making Supervisor
Operator
Wax Piece Maker 7313.2402
Washing 8154.0500 8264.60
Machineman
Wax Setter 7313.0803
Washing Plant 8112.0600 8112.45
Operator Wax Tree Maker 7313.0804
Waste Machine 7318.1500 7431.22 Waxing Man 7316.0500 7323.50
Man (Cotton (Glass)/Helper
Textile)/Waste Calibrator/Decorat
Collection or, Glass
Machine Operator
Weather Observer 3119.0600 3119.40
Waste 2143.0400 2149.87
VOLUME I 366
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Setter
Weaver Power 7318.5500 7432.55
Loom
Welding Operator 8212.1901
Weaver, 7318.5800 7432.58
Welding 3122.4702
Handloom
Supervisor
Weaver, Lace 8152.1200 8262.60
Welding 7212.0302
(Machine)
Technician
Weaving and 8152.9900 8262.90
Well Digger 7119.0100 7129.10
Knitting Machine
Operators, Other
Well Digger Helper 9313.0100 9313.10
Weaving Master 2141.1500 2149.40
Well Driller, 8113.0800 8113.45
Machine (Other
Web Designer 2166.0300 2452.80
than Petroleum
and Gas)
Web Developer 2513.0101
Well Drillers and 8113.9900 8113.90
Weigher 9321.1101 9322.76
Borers and
Related Workers,
Weighter, Silk 8151.2100 8261.88
Other
Welder 7212.0301
Well Drillers, 8113.0100 8113.10
Welder, Electric 7212.0200 7212.20 Petroleum and
Gas
Welder, Gas 7212.0100 7212.10
Well Puller 8113.0500 8113.30
Welder, Machine 7212.0300 7212.30
Well Pulling 3121.0700 8118.40
Supervisor
Welder, 7212.0700 7212.65
Resistance
Welt Sewer, 8156.0900 8266.25
Machine/Machine
Welders and 7212.9900 7212.90
Operator, Welt
Flame Cutters,
Sewing
Other
Wet Disk Operator 8181.3000 8139.75
Welding Assistant 7212.0801
(Abrasive)
Welding Machine 3122.4701
VOLUME I 367
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Silver/Component
Wheat Cultivator 6111.0201
Maker
Wheel Grinder 7315.1600 7322.38
Wire Saw 8111.2901
(Glass)
Operator
Whip Maker 7536.2500 7442.82
Wireless Inspector 3522.0400 3114.50
Electronics
White Washer 7119.0200 7129.20
Wireless Operator 3521.1300 3132.65
Wholesale Dealer 5249.0400 5220.50
Wireman, Light 7411.0301 7137.20
Wig Maker 7531.1000 7433.60
and Power
Wigman 5142.0600 5141.70
Wiring Inspector 7419.0300 7249.30
Winchman 8343.1100 8333.32 and Bank Tester
(Telephone
Winder 8151.1800 8261.85 Equipment
Textile/Winding Manufacturing)
Operator
Withering Loft 8160.5800 8277.15
Winding 8343.1400 8333.40 Attendant (Tea)
Engineman
Women’s Welfare 2635.0200 2446.20
Winding Operator 8212.1802 Officer
Window Opener 7313.1702 Women’s Welfare 2635.0700 2446.50
Organizer
Wine Waiter 5131.0500 5123.50
Wood Anatomist 2132.0600 2213.60
Wire Bonding 8212.1701
Operator
Wood Bender 7521.0300 7421.30
Wire Boy, Paper 8171.1400 8143.20
Wood Carver, 7522.1200 7422.42
Hand
Wire Drawer/Wire 7221.0700 7221.70
Drawing Machine
Wood Carver, 7523.1600 8241.10
Operator
Machine
Wire Maker, Gold 7313.0201 7313.15
Wood Chopping 8172.1000 8141.65
and
VOLUME I 368
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Machine Operator
Wood Working 7523.9900 8241.90
Machine Setters
Wood Cutter 6210.1100 6141.60
and Setter
Operators, Others
Wood Lacquerer 7522.1900 7422.60
Wood, Turner 7523.0300 7423.20
Wood Machinist, 7523.0100 7423.10
Hand
General
Wool Dyer 8154.1200 8264.70
Wood Marker 7522.0900 7422.35
Wool Sorter 7318.1100 7431.14
Wood Polisher 7522.2000 7422.62
Work Supervisor, 3123.0100 7138.10
Wood Processing 8172.9900 8141.90
Construction
Plant Operators
and Related
Working 1120.1200 1213.40
Workers, Other
Proprietor,
Construction/Prop
Wood Sawyer, 8172.0200 8141.20
rietor,
Edger
Construction
Wood Sawyer, 7523.0800 7423.42
Working 1120.0100 1211.10
Hand
Proprietor,
Wood Sawyer, 8172.0100 8141.10 Electricity
Machine, General
Working 1120.0200 1211.20
Wood 2141.2000 2149.60 Proprietor, Gas
Technologist
Working 1120.2900 1217.10
Wood Treater 7521.0400 7421.40 Proprietor,
Lodging and
Wood Treaters, 7521.9900 7421.90 Catering Services
Other
Working 1120.1700 1214.10
Wood Turner, 7523.0200 7423.15 Proprietor,
Machine Manufacturing/Pr
oprietor,
Wood Wool 7523.1500 7423.80 Manufacturing
Machine Operator
Working 1120.0900 1213.10
VOLUME I 369
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004 Title 2015 2004
Proprietor,
Working 1120.1900 1214.30
Mines/Proprietor,
Proprietor,
Mines
Wholesale
Trade/Proprietor,
Working 1120.3500 1219.10
Wholesale Trade
Proprietor, Other
Services
Works Inspector, 2141.0100 2149.10
Engineering/Inspe
Working 1120.1000 1213.20
ction Engineer
Proprietor,
Quarry/Proprietor,
Works Poor 8160.5400 8276.83
Quarry
Attendant
Working 1120.3200 1218.10
Workshop 3115.0105
Proprietor,
Manager
Recreation and
Entertainment
Wrapper 8152.1700 8262.81
Working 1120.2000 1214.40
X-Ray Mechanic 7422.1000 7243.30
Proprietor, Retail
Trade/Proprietor, X-Ray Technician 3211.0100 3133.10
Retail Trade
Yard Foreman, 3115.1500 3115.65
Working 1120.2700 1216.10 Railway
Proprietor,
Storage and Yard Master, 4323.0100 4133.10
Warehousing Railway
Working 1120.2300 1215.10 Yard Officer 6224.0800 6159.30
Proprietor,
Transport Yarn Tester 8151.1400 8261.81
Working 1120.0300 1211.30 Yeast Maker 8160.7200 8278.18
Proprietor, Water
Yeast Maker 7512.1000 7412.70
Supply
(Beverage)
Working 1120.1100 1213.30
Zoo Veterinarian 2250.0500 2226.40
Proprietor, Well
Drilling/Proprietor,
Well Drilling
VOLUME I 370
National Classification of Occupations – 2015 Alphabetical Index
Occupational NCO NCO
Title 2015 2004
Zoologist, General 2131.0900 2211.60
VOLUME I 371